<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 5th Sunday in Lent

## During the service

## Announcements

* Thank you for your prayers for Verna Steinbrenner. She was doing better yesterday. Please pray for Paula and her family as they continue to take excellent care of Verna.
* This Wednesday is the last “The Ten Commandments” Bible study 4:30‑6; soup supper 6‑7; service at 7.
* Next Sunday is Palm Sunday AND Confirmation Sunday for Trevon and Lexie.
* See your bulletin for list of all Holy Week services and events.

## Old Testament [Is 43:16-21 ESV]

> [16] Thus says the Lord,  
> who makes a way in the sea,  
> a path in the mighty waters,  
> [17] who brings forth chariot and horse,  
> army and warrior;  
> they lie down, they cannot rise,  
> they are extinguished, quenched like a wick:  
> [18] “Remember not the former things,  
> nor consider the things of old.  
> [19] Behold, I am doing a new thing;  
> now it springs forth, do you not perceive it?  
> I will make a way in the wilderness  
> and rivers in the desert.  
> [20] The wild beasts will honor me,  
> the jackals and the ostriches,  
> for I give water in the wilderness,  
> rivers in the desert,  
> to give drink to my chosen people,  
> [21] the people whom I formed for myself  
> that they might declare my praise.

## Epistle [Philippians 3:(4b-14) ESV; sermon text]

[4b]  If anyone else thinks he has reason for confidence in the flesh, I have more: [5] circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; as to the law, a Pharisee; [6] as to zeal, a persecutor of the church; as to righteousness under the law, blameless. [7] But whatever gain I had, I counted as loss for the sake of Christ. [8] Indeed, I count everything as loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as rubbish, in order that I may gain Christ [9] and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which comes through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God that depends on faith— [10] that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, [11] that by any means possible I may attain the resurrection from the dead.
[12] Not that I have already obtained this or am already perfect, but I press on to make it my own, because Christ Jesus has made me his own. [13] Brothers, I do not consider that I have made it my own. But one thing I do: forgetting what lies behind and straining forward to what lies ahead, [14] I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 20:9-20 ESV]

[9] And [Jesus] began to tell the people this parable: “A man planted a vineyard and let it out to tenants and went into another country for a long while. [10] When the time came, he sent a servant to the tenants, so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed. [11] And he sent another servant. But they also beat and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed. [12] And he sent yet a third. This one also they wounded and cast out. [13] Then the owner of the vineyard said, ‘What shall I do? I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him.’ [14] But when the tenants saw him, they said to themselves, ‘This is the heir. Let us kill him, so that the inheritance may be ours.’ [15] And they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. What then will the owner of the vineyard do to them? [16] He will come and destroy those tenants and give the vineyard to others.” When they heard this, they said, “Surely not!” [17] But he looked directly at them and said, “What then is this that is written:

> “‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone’?

[18] Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, and when it falls on anyone, it will crush him.”
[19] The scribes and the chief priests sought to lay hands on him at that very hour, for they perceived that he had told this parable against them, but they feared the people. [20] So they watched him and sent spies, who pretended to be sincere, that they might catch him in something he said, so as to deliver him up to the authority and jurisdiction of the governor.

## Introit [Ps 3:3-6; antiphon: Ps 3:8]

> Salvation belongs | to the LORD;*  
> your blessing be on your | people!.  
> But you, O LORD, are a shield a- | bout me,*  
> my glory, and the lifter | of my head.  
> I cried aloud | to the LORD,*  
> and he answered me from his | holy hill.  
> I lay | down and slept;*  
> I woke again, for the LORD sus- | tained me.  
> I will not be afraid of many thousands of | people*  
> who have set themselves against me | all around.  

## Collect

Almighty God,
by Your great goodness mercifully look upon Your people
that we may be governed and preserved evermore in body and soul;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 144 _Jesus Grant that Balm and Healing_ 
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 371 _Jesus, Thy Blood and Righteousness_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 142 _A Lamb Goes Uncomplaining Forth_ st 1-3, 6

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, do any of you have confidence in the flesh?
Were you born into the royal family?
Were you born into a family of surgeons?
In our Epistle reading St Paul states, “**If anyone else thinks he has reason for confidence in the flesh, _I have more_.**
For you may have been born into a family of surgeons and you may be Queen Elizabeth's great‑niece, but I, Paul, am a Jew, **circumcised on the eighth day, of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews,** _God's chosen people_.”
Now German people might ask, “What's so special about Jews? German people are special, too.”
But did God lead the German people through the Red Sea out of Egyptian slavery?
Did God give the Ten Commandments on stone tablets to the German people and tell them, “You are my chosen people who will live not as the Gentile nations, but according to My just laws?”
And most importantly, did God promise your people a prophet like Moses who will be from among _your own brothers_, in whose mouth will be the Words of God that He will speak in God's name [(Dt 18:18‑19)](http://www.esvbible.org/Deuteronomy%2018%3A18-19/)?
Beloved in the Lord, what makes the Jewish people so special is that Jesus, the prophet promised to Moses, the sin‑bearer of _all_ nations, is a Jew.
He is the King of the Jews and Savior of the nations.
So, St Paul has something to boast about since he, too, is a Jew.

But who were _you_ once?
A Jew? A surgeon? A member of the royal family?
Or a dock worker? Or an office worker?
_Who were you once … and who will you be at the resurrection of the dead?_
There may be something to what you have accomplished.
There may be something to who you were born as.
(Personally, I would be honored to know you if you were Queen Elizabeth's great‑niece.)
_But what is that compared to knowing Jesus?_
Beloved in the Lord, you can drop everything for Jesus, and you will lose nothing!

> **“But whatever gain I had, I counted as loss for the sake of Christ. Indeed, I count everything as loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as _rubbish_, in order that I may gain Christ.”**

Beloved in the Lord, with all respect to who you are and what you have done, these are rubbish compared to gaining Christ.
To gain Christ, you must first be a sinner—not a proud sinner, but a _contrite_ sinner begging for God's mercy.
And I declare to you today that Christ was crucified in punishment for your sins, whose precious blood shed on the Cross pleads for your forgiveness.
And God has heard that plea by resurrecting Christ from the dead.
The One who was made sin for you is now alive _forever_,
and He has promised you the same thing—that you, too, be resurrected from the dead and live forever.
What Christ has promised He will deliver, for He is the one who said of His own body, **“Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up”** [(Jn 2:19)](http://www.esvbible.org/John%202%3A19/).
That is a done deal, and all that remains is that He now do it for you.

Your righteousness before God depends on your trust that He has forgiven you, your righteousness before God depends on your trust that He is risen from the dead, and righteousness before God depends on your trust that He will perform all that He has promised you. Faith alone—believe it and you have it.
In the mean time, you will share in His suffering.

> **That I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, that by any means possible I may attain the resurrection from the dead.**

Beloved in the Lord, it is not who you were, it is who you will be. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

## Notes

Php 3:13. Contrast who you once were versus who you will be.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
