<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 2nd Sunday in Lent

## During the service

* Many of you may not have sung our sermon hymn before, and it is a bit complicated.
Matt Liese will sing the first stanza solo(?).
* Scott is reader

## Announcements

* Please pray for Verna Steinbrenner: she is ill at home and dealing with pain.
* Please pray for Lou Ferencik: he is in the hospital and may have had some mini strokes.
* “The Ten Commandments” Bible study and movie Wednesdays 4:30‑6; soup supper 6‑7; service at 7 (sermon on the Lord's Prayer).

## Old Testament [Jer 26:8‑15 ESV]

[8] And when Jeremiah had finished speaking all that the LORD had commanded him to speak to all the people, then the priests and the prophets and all the people laid hold of him, saying, “You shall die! [9] Why have you prophesied in the name of the LORD, saying, ‘This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate, without inhabitant’?” And all the people gathered around Jeremiah in the house of the LORD.

[10] When the officials of Judah heard these things, they came up from the king's house to the house of the LORD and took their seat in the entry of the New Gate of the house of the LORD. [11] Then the priests and the prophets said to the officials and to all the people, “This man deserves the sentence of death, because he has prophesied against this city, as you have heard with your own ears.”

[12] Then Jeremiah spoke to all the officials and all the people, saying, “The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and this city all the words you have heard. [13] Now therefore mend your ways and your deeds, and obey the voice of the LORD your God, and the LORD will relent of the disaster that he has pronounced against you. [14] But as for me, behold, I am in your hands. Do with me as seems good and right to you. [15] Only know for certain that if you put me to death, you will bring innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this city and its inhabitants, for in truth the LORD sent me to you to speak all these words in your ears.”

## Epistle [Php 3:17‑4:1 ESV; sermon text]

[17] Brothers, join in imitating me, and keep your eyes on those who walk according to the example you have in us. [18] For many, of whom I have often told you and now tell you even with tears, walk as enemies of the cross of Christ. [19] Their end is destruction, their god is their belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things. [20] But our citizenship is in heaven, and from it we await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, [21] who will transform our lowly body to be like his glorious body, by the power that enables him even to subject all things to himself.

[1] Therefore, my brothers, whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm thus in the Lord, my beloved.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 13:31‑35 ESV]

[31] At that very hour some Pharisees came and said to him, “Get away from here, for Herod wants to kill you.” [32] And [Jesus] said to them, “Go and tell that fox, ‘Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I finish my course. [33] Nevertheless, I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the day following, for it cannot be that a prophet should perish away from Jerusalem.’ [34] O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it! How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were not willing! [35] Behold, your house is forsaken. And I tell you, you will not see me until you say, ‘Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!’”

## Introit [Ps 74:1‑3; antiphon: Ps 69:9]

> For zeal for your house has con- | sumed me,*  
> and the reproaches of those who reproach you have fall- | en on me.  
> O God, why do you cast us off for- | ever?*  
> Why does your anger smoke against the sheep of your | pasture?  
> Remember your congregation, which you have purchased of old, which you have redeemed to be the tribe of your | heritage!*  
> Remember Mount Zion, where | you have dwelt.  
> Direct your steps to the perpetual | ruins;*   
> the enemy has destroyed everything in the sanctu- | ary!
	
## Collect

O God, You see that of ourselves we have no strength. By Your mighty power defend us from all adversities that may happen to the body and from all evil thoughts that may assault and hurt the soul; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TSC_ 127 _Beneath the Cross of Jesus_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 429 _Lord, Thee I Love with All My Heart_
* Closing hymn: _TSC_ 129 _Were You There?_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, there is rising opposition to Christianity.
Some who oppose Christianity would say they can worship God as they like and that God accepts this.
They might say, “There are many roads to heaven.”
Yet Jesus says, **“No one comes to the Father except through me”** [(Jn 14:6 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/John+14:6/).
Some who oppose Christianity would say that they do not believe in God.
Yet the Bible says, **“The fool says in his heart, ‘There is no God.’ They are corrupt, they do abominable deeds, there is none who does good”** [(Ps 14:1)](http://www.esvbible.org/Psalm%2014%3A1/).
	
And there those who oppose Christianity who are named by St Paul in our Epistle reading as _enemies of the Cross_.

> **For many, of whom I have often told you and now tell you even with tears, walk as _enemies of the cross of Christ_. Their end is destruction, their god is their belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things.**

It is not clear who these enemies of the Cross are, but I will take a clue from the Holy Gospel to give you an example of a whole family **with minds set on earthly things**. From the Holy Gospel:

> **Some Pharisees came and said to [Jesus], “Get away from here, for Herod wants to kill you.”** [(Lk 13:31)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%2013%3A31/)

Herod. The name _Herod_ in the Bible is used for more than one man.
The Herod of this verse is also known as Herod Antipas, who is the Herod who
committed adultery by marrying his brother's wife and had John the Baptist beheaded [(Mk 6:14‑29)](http://www.esvbible.org/Mark%206%3A14-29/).
Not only this Herod, Herod Antipas, had his mind set on earthly things,
but it is fair to say that he came from a _family_ whose mind was set on earthly things: the influential and respected family of Herod.

So let us rewind to be beginning of the New Testament. Jesus is born and the wise men come to _Herod_ looking for the king of the Jews.
This is the _father_ of Herod Antipas; this is Herod the Great.
This is the Herod that the wise men came to when they were looking for the baby Jesus.
This is the Herod who ordered the killing of the baby boys in Bethlehem [(Mt 2:16‑18)](http://www.esvbible.org/Matthew%202%3A16-18/).
This is not unusual for Herod the Great, for the Roman emperor Augustus said,
“I would rather be Herod's pig than his son.”

You see, Herod the Great divorced his first wife, Doris, to marry his second wife, Mariamme, who had the political connections he needed to move up in the Roman scheme of things.
Those political connections worked great and then Herod had Mariamme's grandfather executed.
Oh, after he was married to Mariamme about ten years, he became suspicious of Mariamme, charged her with adultery, and had her executed.
Then he executed his mother-in-law, Mariamme's mother.

Now, you must not forget that Herod the Great was a successful king.
He built cities, he built palaces, he built memorials, and last but not least,
he rebuilt the temple in Jerusalem.
This is the temple where our Lord Jesus appeared.
Herod was a progressive leader, for when he built the temple in Jerusalem, he added for the first time a court of Gentiles and a court of women.
Who said Herod was a bad guy?
It is said that the economy of Judea improved under Herod's rule.
It is all about the economy, right?

Herod the Great had, in the end, ten wives and fifteen children. Most of his sons were brought up in Rome, and were groomed to be his successors.
But eventually the successors began to squabble and maybe even threaten their father, for maybe they were just a little bit resentful that Herod had killed their mother.
So Herod had his sons put to death.

His son, Herod Antipas, is the Herod who married his brother's wife and had John the Baptist put to death.
This Herod is also the Herod who mocked our Lord Jesus on the day He was crucified for our sins.
This Herod, and I would say all the Herods, were **_enemies of the cross of Christ_. Their end is destruction, their god is their belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things.**

Being focused on earthly things and worldly success has a dark side to it, and it makes you an enemy of the Cross of Christ.

> **But our citizenship is in heaven, and from it we await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who will transform our lowly body to be like his glorious body, by the power that enables him even to subject all things to himself.**

**Therefore, my brothers, whom I love and long for, my joy and crown, stand firm thus in the Lord, my beloved.**

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>THEME</center>

1. Jesus was tempted as we are.
1. Call on the name
    1. of an idol and be destroyed.
    1. of the LORD
        1. Jesus survived Satan's temptation by properly interpreting God's Word.
        1. Clinging to God's Word is to honor His name.
1. and be saved from shame.

## Notes

Jer 26:11. The prophets and priests call for Jeremiah's death because he has prophesied against Jerusalem.

Php 3:18‑19. The end of the enemies of the Cross is destruction; their thoughts and deeds are futile: **“Their end is destruction, their god is their belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things.”**

Lk 13:31. This is Herod Antipas.

Lk 13:34. If we are not saved the fault is ours, not God's.

### The Herods<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

We know of the king Herod who ordered the slaughter of the Holy Innocents soon after Jesus was born [Mt 2:16‑18](http://www.esvbible.org/Matthew%202%3A16-18/).
But before Herod was his father Antipas.
In today's language, you would say that Antipas was a politician.
He was an Idumean noble. Idumea is territory next to Edom.
What he accomplished during his career was to win close ties and influence
with the Roman empire in the Holy Land.
He was then able to give important Roman appointments to his two sons.
Phasael became governor of Jerusalem and Herod became governor of Galilee.

Herod, known as Herod the Great, is the Herod of Mt 2:16‑18.
After being governor of Galilee, he was appointed king of Judea in 40 B.C.
He ruled from 40‑4 B.C.
Herod converted to Judaism but was trusted by the Romans.
Though he was cruel, the lot of the Jews improved under his reign.

Herod divorced his first wife Doris and became engaged to Mariamme, who was the granddaughter of his supporter, Hyrcanus II. (Herod later executed Hyrcanus II.)
Herod married Mariamme in 37 B.C.
After ten years of marriage, Herod became suspicious of Mariamme, charged her with adultery,
and had her executed in 28 or 27 B.C.
Later, he executed Mariamme's mother, Alexandra, his ex-mother-in-law.

Herod had ten wives and fifteen children.
Most of his sons were brought up in Rome, and were groomed to be his successors.

Herod the Great rebuilt the temple in Jerusalem;
he added a court of Gentiles and a court of women.
This was the temple in which Jesus appeared.
But he built a lot everywhere: he built cities, temples, palaces, and memorials.
There were complaints that he built more outside the Holy Land than in the Holy Land.	

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
David Noel Freedman, ed., _Eerdmans Dictionary of the Bible_ (Grand Rapids MI: Eerdmans, 2000) 579‑584
