<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 6th after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Matt Liese is reader.

## Announcements

* VBS July 11‑15
* Cavs won.

## Old Testament [1 Kings 19:9b-21 ESV]


[9b] And behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and he said to him, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” [10] He said, “I have been very jealous for the Lord, the God of hosts. For the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, thrown down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword, and I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life, to take it away.” [11] And he said, “Go out and stand on the mount before the Lord.” And behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind tore the mountains and broke in pieces the rocks before the Lord, but the Lord
was not in the wind. And after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake. [12] And after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire. And after the fire the sound of a low whisper. [13] And when Elijah heard it, he wrapped
his face in his cloak and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. And behold, there came a voice to him and said, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” [14] He said, “I have been very jealous for the Lord, the God of hosts. For the people of Israel 
have forsaken your covenant, thrown down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword, and I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life, to take it away.” [15] And the Lord said to him, “Go, return on your way to the wilderness of Damascus. And 
when you arrive, you shall anoint Hazael to be king over Syria. [16] And Jehu the son of Nimshi you shall anoint to be king over Israel, and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah you shall anoint to be prophet in your place. [17] And the one who escapes
from the sword of Hazael shall Jehu put to death, and the one who escapes from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha put to death. [18] Yet I will leave seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him.”

[19] So he departed from there and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen in front of him, and he was with the twelfth. Elijah passed by him and cast his cloak upon him. [20] And he left the oxen and ran after Elijah 
and said, “Let me kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow you.” And he said to him, “Go back again, for what have I done to you?” [21] And he returned from following him and took the yoke of oxen and sacrificed them and boiled their flesh 
with the yokes of the oxen and gave it to the people, and they ate. Then he arose and went after Elijah and assisted him.

## Epistle [Gal 5:1,13-25 ESV; sermon text]

[1] For freedom Christ has set us free; stand firm therefore, and do not submit again to a yoke of slavery. [13] For you were called to freedom, brothers. Only do not use your freedom as an opportunity for the flesh, but through love serve one another. [14] For the whole law is fulfilled in one word: “You shall love your neighbor as yourself.” [15] But if you bite and devour one another, watch out that you are not consumed by one another.

[16] But I say, walk by the Spirit, and you will not gratify the desires of the flesh. [17] For the desires of the flesh are against the Spirit, and the desires of the Spirit are against the flesh, for these are opposed to each other, to keep you from doing the things you want to do. [18] But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law. [19] Now the works of the flesh are evident: sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, 20 idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, [21] envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these. I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God. [22] But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, [23] gentleness, self-control; against such things there is no law. [24] And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.

[25] If we live by the Spirit, let us also keep in step with the Spirit. 

## Holy Gospel [Lk 9:51-62 ESV]

[51] When the days drew near for him to be taken up, he set his face to go to Jerusalem. [52] And he sent messengers ahead of him, who went and entered a village of the Samaritans, to make preparations for him. [53] But the people did not receive him, because his face was set toward Jerusalem. [54] And when his disciples James and John saw it, they said, “Lord, do you want us to tell fire to come down from heaven and consume them?” [55] But he turned and rebuked them. [56] And they went on to another village.

[57] As they were going along the road, someone said to him, “I will follow you wherever you go.” [58] And Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.” [59] To another he said, “Follow me.” But he said, “Lord, let me first go and bury my father.” [60] And Jesus said to him, “Leave the dead to bury their own dead. But as for you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God.” [61] Yet another said, “I will follow you, Lord, but let me first say farewell to those at my home.” [62] Jesus said to him, “No one who puts his hand to the plow and looks back is fit for the kingdom of God.”

## Introit [Ps 85:8-10, 13; antiphon: Ps 85:7]

> Show us your steadfast love, | O LORD,*  
> and grant us your sal- | vation.  
> Let me hear what God the | LORD will speak,*  
> for he will speak peace to his people, to his saints; but let them not turn back to | folly.  
> Surely his salvation is near to those who | fear him,*  
> that glory may dwell | in our land.  
> Steadfast love and faith- | fulness meet;*  
> righteousness and peace kiss each | other.  
> Righteousness will go be- | fore him*  
> and make his foot- | steps a way.

## Collect

Lord of all power and might, author and giver of all good things, graft into our hearts the love of Your name and nourish us with all goodness that we may love and serve our neighbor; 
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TSC_ 318 _Be Still, My Soul_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 490 _Pour Out Thy Spirit from on High_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_315 _sts. 6-10 _I Come, O Savior, To Thy Table_
* Closing hymn: _TSC_ 182 _Spirit of God, Descend upon My Heart_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, in St&nbsp;Paul's letter to the Galatians, up to this point in my preaching, the main point is that by faith in Jesus Christ, we have died to the Law.
From Galatians, chapter&nbsp;2:

> **For through the law I died to the law, so that I might live to God. I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.** [(Gal&nbsp;2:19&#x2011;20 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Galatians%202%3A19-20/)

From Galatians, chapter&nbsp;3:

> **Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us&mdash;for it is written, “Cursed is everyone who is hanged on a tree.”** [(Gal&nbsp;3:13)](http://www.esvbible.org/Galatians%203%3A13/)

Keeping the Law&mdash;keeping the Ten Commandments&mdash;is good.
But having broken the Ten Commandments&mdash;even one of them&mdash;brings a curse upon us; the punishment is death and hell.
This delights the devil to no end, for he has been a murderer from the beginning [(Jn&nbsp;8:44)](http://www.esvbible.org/John%208%3A44/) and desires nothing more than the death of sinners.
&ldquo;Send the people to the Law! Let them die! Let the Law kill them! Let the Law kill them! Let them disrespect their parents! Let them love money! Let them seek pleasure where God has not ordained it! Let them love themselves and no one else! I love it! I love it!&rdquo;

> **O LORD, &hellip; Do not sweep my soul away with sinners, nor my life with bloodthirsty men.** [(Ps&nbsp;26:9 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Psalm+26:9/)

As we plead with God for mercy, He reminds us in His Word that were made in His image [(Gn&nbsp;1:27)](http://www.esvbible.org/Genesis%201%3A27/).
As we plead with God for mercy, we are reminded that He says through the mouth of the prophet Ezekiel,

> **&ldquo;Have I any pleasure in the death of the wicked, &hellip; and not rather that he should turn from his way and live?&rdquo;** [(Ezk&nbsp;18:23 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ezekiel%2018%3A23/)

Yes, He would rather that we live, and for this He sent His Son.
His only-begotten Son became one of us so that He could die as a men&mdash;His only-begotten Son then died the death of the wicked&mdash;His only-begotten Son became the curse of the Law for us&mdash;_[Point to Crucifixiion window]_ He was cursed and died in our place on the altar of wood, the Cross.
_Do you believe He did it for **you**?_
Then you are saved from your sins, you are saved from death, and you are saved from hell.
_That is faith: do you believe He did it for you? Yes!_

You need not keep any of God's Commandments&mdash;you can even hate your neighbor&mdash;but believe that He died on the Cross for your sins&mdash;believe that you are now forgiven by the name of Jesus&mdash;and you are saved.
And you confess, **&ldquo;I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me.&rdquo;**
And you are baptized by which you put on Christ and receive the Holy Spirit (Gal&nbsp;3:27; Ac&nbsp;2:38), and, indeed, _Christ lives in you_.

And you will not hate your neigbhor anymore.
By faith in Jesus your inner life has changed: your flesh has been crucified with Jesus.
What is the flesh?
Your flesh, as is described in Galatians, is your sinful nature.
Your flesh is your old Adam, who wants only for himself.
Your flesh is your old Eve, who wants to be like God, knowing good and evil (Gn&nbsp;3).
Once your flesh knows evil, there is not stopping it.

> **Now the works of the flesh are evident: sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these. I warn you, as I warned you before, that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.**

Without the Holy Spirit, that is all you are.
Without faith in Jesus you have no Holy Spirit.
But beloved in the Lord, together with your Baptism you are given the Spirit.

> **But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control; against such things there is no law.**

(If you want to spend a whole week with the fruits of the Spirit, come to Vacation Bible School July&nbsp;11&#x2011;15!)

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

1Ki 19:15‑18. Hazael, Jehu, and Elisha are instruments of God's judgment on Baal worshipers.

Gal 5. I have been crucified to the Law, but my flesh has also been crucified.

From the Introit, the Holy Spirit will not let you turn back to folly.

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0001" href="#id0001">§</a>]</sup>

