<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 6th Sunday of Easter

## During the service

* Practice Matins p32 ONCE, then p33 to top of p34 TWICE: (Congregants can follow in TLH OR if don't want page turn, they can follow the text printed on the INSERT)
* Hymn sing request: TLH 651 Be Still My Soul
* Trina is reader

## Announcements

* Thank you to all who participated in last night's Family Fun Night.

## First Reading [Ac 16:9-15 ESV]

[9] And a vision appeared to Paul in the night: a man of Macedonia was standing there, urging him and saying, “Come over to Macedonia and help us.” [10] And when Paul had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go on into Macedonia, concluding that God had called us to preach the gospel to them.
[11]  So, setting sail from Troas, we made a direct voyage to Samothrace, and the following day to Neapolis, [12] and from there to Philippi, which is a leading city of the district of Macedonia and a Roman colony. We remained in this city some days. [13] And on the Sabbath day we went outside the gate to the riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down and spoke to the women who had come together. [14] One who heard us was a woman named Lydia, from the city of Thyatira, a seller of purple goods, who was a worshiper of God. The Lord opened her heart to pay attention to what was said by Paul. [15] And after she was baptized, and her household as well, she urged us, saying, “If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come to my house and stay.” And she prevailed upon us.

## Epistle [Rv 21:9-14, 21-27 ESV; sermon text]

[9] Then came one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues and spoke to me, saying, “Come, I will show you the Bride, the wife of the Lamb.” [10] And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great, high mountain, and showed me the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, [11] having the glory of God, its radiance like a most rare jewel, like a jasper, clear as crystal. [12] It had a great, high wall, with twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and on the gates the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel were inscribed— [13] on the east three gates, on the north three gates, on the south three gates, and on the west three gates. [14] And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

[21] And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, each of the gates made of a single pearl, and the street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
[22] And I saw no temple in the city, for its temple is the Lord God the Almighty and the Lamb. [23] And the city has no need of sun or moon to shine on it, for the glory of God gives it light, and its lamp is the Lamb. [24] By its light will the nations walk, and the kings of the earth will bring their glory into it, [25] and its gates will never be shut by day—and there will be no night there. [26] They will bring into it the glory and the honor of the nations. [27] But nothing unclean will ever enter it, nor anyone who does what is detestable or false, but only those who are written in the Lamb's book of life.

## Holy Gospel [John 16:23-33 ESV]

[23] In that day you will ask nothing of me. Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you ask of the Father in my name, he will give it to you. [24] Until now you have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be full.

[25] “I have said these things to you in figures of speech. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures of speech but will tell you plainly about the Father. [26] In that day you will ask in my name, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf; [27] for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me and have believed that I came from God. [28] I came from the Father and have come into the world, and now I am leaving the world and going to the Father.”

[29] His disciples said, “Ah, now you are speaking plainly and not using figurative speech! [30] Now we know that you know all things and do not need anyone to question you; this is why we believe that you came from God.” [31] Jesus answered them, “Do you now believe? [32] Behold, the hour is coming, indeed it has come, when you will be scattered, each to his own home, and will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me. [33] I have said these things to you, that in me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation. But take heart; I have overcome the world.”

## Introit [Ps 55:4, 16-18; antiphon: Ps 55:22]

> Cast your burden on the LORD, and he will sus- | tain you;*  
> he will never permit the righteous to | be moved.  
> My heart is in anguish with- | in me;*  
> the terrors of death have fallen up- | on me.  
> But I | call to God,*  
> and the LORD will | save me.  
> Evening and morning and at noon I utter my com- | plaint and moan,*  
> and he | hears my voice.  
> He redeems my soul in safety from the battle | that I wage,*  
> for many are arrayed a- | gainst me.  

## Collect

O God,
the giver of all that is good,
by Your holy inspiration
grant that we may think those things that are right
and by Your merciful guiding accomplish them;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord,
who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit,
one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 200 _I Know that My Redeemer Lives stnzs 1-3, 7, 8_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 42 _O Thou Love Unbounded_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 203 _Morning Breaks Upon the Tomb_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, last week you heard about your heavenly home and that it has a name revealed in the book of Revelation:

> **Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more. And I saw the holy city, _new Jerusalem_, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared _as a bride adorned for her husband_,** [(Rv 21:1‑2 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation%2021%3A1-2/)

where the husband is Jesus Christ and the bride is His Church—you and I.
Today, we hear more about new Jerusalem:

> **Then came one of the seven angels who had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues and spoke to me, saying, “Come, I will show you the Bride, the wife of the Lamb.” And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great, high mountain, and showed me the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God, its radiance like a most rare jewel, like a jasper, clear as crystal.**

New Jerusalem is the Bride, the wife of the Lamb, the wife of Jesus Christ.
And although there are seven seals and seven plagues in the book of Revelation—and a lot of speculation to go along with it—the book of Revelation reveals the culmination of Christ the Bridegroom and His Church, His Bride.
I will focus today on *marriage*.
Christ's relationship with His Church is described as *marriage* in the book of Revelation,
but you must know that Christ's relationship with His Church is described as marriage *throughout the Bible*.

There are copious statements and declarations of God's faithfulness throughout the Old Testament; Deuteronomy, chapter 7, verse 9, for example:

> **Know therefore that the LORD your God is God, the faithful God who keeps covenant and steadfast love with those who love him and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations, and repays to their face those who hate him, by destroying them.** [(Dt 7:9‑10 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Deuteronomy%207%3A9-10/)

When faithful God is angry with Israelite idolatry, he uses adultery as the metaphor to express His anger—God views Himself as husband and the Israelites as His adulterous wife.
Now, I am not going to read these passages out loud at this time, and I warn you that the language is offensive, but [Jeremiah, chapter 3](http://www.esvbible.org/Exodus%2034%3A15/) and [Ezekiel, chapter 23](http://www.esvbible.org/Ezekiel+23:11/) are a couple of passages where God Himself expresses His anger at idolatry using the language of adultery and fornication.
The point is that sin—turning your heart away from God—makes Him an angry husband, for all sin is idolatry.

And this is meaningful to man because _man has been married from the beginning_.
Marriage between a man and his wife was instituted by God in the Garden of Eden, which you can read for yourself in the second chapter of Genesis:

> **Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother and hold fast to his wife, and they shall become one flesh.** [(Gn 2:24 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Genesis%202%3A24/)

Adam and Eve were married and marriage has continued to this day as the faithful, physical bond between man and wife.
Man knows about marriage and God relates to man through marriage.
Marriage is more than an illustration—it is a reality shared by both God and man.

Yet faithful God would rather not be angry against unfaithful sinners forever.

> **“Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, not like the covenant that I made with their fathers on the day when I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, my covenant [of the Ten Commandments] that they broke, _though I was their [faithful] husband_, declares the LORD.”** [(Jer 31:31‑32 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Jeremiah%2031%3A31-32/)

The new covenant, as you know—the new covenant, as you should rejoice—is the free forgiveness of sins in the name of God's Son Jesus, who was crucified for your sins and raised for your justification [(Rm 4:25)](http://www.esvbible.org/Romans+4:25/).
God, your faithful husband, has taken action to have you back, His unfaithful, sinful wife.
He yearns to have you as *His* bride, and He will, by redeeming you with His own blood, by washing you with His own water—to buy you back for Himself.

> **Husbands, love your wives, as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her, that he might sanctify her, having cleansed her by the washing of water with the word.** [(Eph 5:25‑26 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ephesians%205%3A25-26/).	

What is wonderful about this verse—what is wonderful about the whole teaching on marriage in Ephesians, chapter 5—is that God's marriage to you, His Church, and your marriage to your spouse are not treated separately—they are spoken of *together*—they are parallel realities.
Do not separate your relationship to Christ from your relationship with your spouse—keep them together—believe in them together.
And husbands, in case this was never made clear to you: you are Christ to your wife; love her as Christ loves His Church.

This will have great meaning in these last days, where Christian husbands are fewer and fewer as wickedness grows greater and greater.
Husbands, hold fast to your wives, and wives to your husbands.
In heaven, this will all come to beautiful fulfillment, when New Jerusalem, the Bride of Christ, will be joined to her Husband and Lord. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes



ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ

