<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 4th Sunday after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Reader</td><td>Matt</td><td align="center"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Put national offering insert in bulletin</td><td>Trina</td><td align="center">✔</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>Speak to congregation about national offering</td><td>Rich</td><td align="center"></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* It is LCMS National Offering Sunday: special insert with responsive prayer.
* Matt Liese is reader.

## Announcements

* Rich will speak after service again about National Offering Sunday

## Old Testament [2Sm 11:26-12:10, 13‑14 ESV]

[26] When the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she lamented over her husband. [27] And when the mourning was over, David sent and brought her to his house, and she became his wife and bore him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased the Lord.

[1] And the Lord sent Nathan to David. He came to him and said to him, “There were two men in a certain city, the one rich and the other poor. [2] The rich man had very many flocks and herds, [3] but the poor man had nothing but one little ewe lamb, which he had bought. And he brought it up, and it grew up with him and with his children. It used to eat of his morsel and drink from his cup and lie in his arms, and it was like a daughter to him. [4] Now there came a traveler to the rich man, and he was unwilling to take one of his own flock or herd to prepare for the guest who had come to him, but he took the poor man's lamb and prepared it for the man who had come to him.” [5] Then David's anger was greatly kindled against the man, and he said to Nathan, “As the Lord lives, the man who has done this deserves to die, [6] and he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.”

[7] Nathan said to David, “You are the man! Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, ‘I anointed you king over Israel, and I delivered you out of the hand of Saul. [8] And I gave you your master's house and your master's wives into your arms and gave you the house of Israel and of Judah. And if this were too little, I would add to you as much more. [9] Why have you despised the word of the Lord, to do what is evil in his sight? You have struck down Uriah the Hittite with the sword and have taken his wife to be your wife and have killed him with the sword of the Ammonites. [10] Now therefore the sword shall never depart from your house, because you have despised me and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be your wife.’” …
[13] David said to Nathan, “I have sinned against the Lord.” And Nathan said to David, “The Lord also has put away your sin; you shall not die. [14] Nevertheless, because by this deed you have utterly scorned the Lord, the child who is born to you shall die.” 


## Epistle [Gal 2:15-21; 3:10‑14 ESV; sermon text]

[15] We ourselves are Jews by birth and not Gentile sinners; [16] yet we know that a person is not justified by works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, so we also have believed in Christ Jesus, in order to be justified by faith in Christ and not by works of the law, because by works of the law no one will be justified.

[17] But if, in our endeavor to be justified in Christ, we too were found to be sinners, is Christ then a servant of sin? Certainly not! [18] For if I rebuild what I tore down, I prove myself to be a transgressor. [19] For through the law I died to the law, so that I might live to God. [20] I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. [21] I do not nullify the grace of God, for if righteousness were through the law, then Christ died for no purpose.

[10] For all who rely on works of the law are under a curse; for it is written, “Cursed be everyone who does not abide by all things written in the Book of the Law, and do them.” [11] Now it is evident that no one is justified before God by the law, for “The righteous shall live by faith.” [12] But the law is not of faith, rather “The one who does them shall live by them.” [13] Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us—for it is written, “Cursed is everyone who is hanged on a tree”— [14] so that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles, so that we might receive the promised Spirit through faith.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 7:36-8:3 ESV]

[36] One of the Pharisees asked him to eat with him, and he went into the Pharisee's house and reclined at the table. [37] And behold, a woman of the city, who was a sinner, when she learned that he was reclining at table in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster flask of ointment, [38] and standing behind him at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears and wiped them with the hair of her head and kissed his feet and anointed them with the ointment. [39] Now when the Pharisee who had invited him saw this, he said to himself, “If this man were a prophet, he would have known who and what sort of woman this is who is touching him, for she is a sinner.” [40] And Jesus answering said to him, “Simon, I have something to say to you.” And he answered, “Say it, Teacher.”

[41] “A certain moneylender had two debtors. One owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty. [42] When they could not pay, he cancelled the debt of both. Now which of them will love him more?” [43] Simon answered, “The one, I suppose, for whom he cancelled the larger debt.” And he said to him, “You have judged rightly.” [44] Then turning toward the woman he said to Simon, “Do you see this woman? I entered your house; you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet with her tears and wiped them with her hair. [45] You gave me no kiss, but from the time I came in she has not ceased to kiss my feet. [46] You did not anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment. [47] Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven—for she loved much. But he who is forgiven little, loves little.” [48] And he said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.” [49] Then those who were at table with him began to say among themselves, “Who is this, who even forgives sins?” [50] And he said to the woman, “Your faith has saved you; go in peace.”

[1] Soon afterward he went on through cities and villages, proclaiming and bringing the good news of the kingdom of God. And the twelve were with him, [2] and also some women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary, called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, [3] and Joanna, the wife of Chuza, Herod's household manager, and Susanna, and many others, who provided for them out of their means.

## Introit [Ps 25:16-18; antiphon: Ps 25:1-2]

> To you, | O LORD,*  
> I lift | up my soul.  
> O my God, in you I trust; let me not be | put to shame;*  
> let not my enemies exult | over me.  
> Turn to me and be gra- | cious to me,*  
> for I am lonely and af- | flicted.  
> The troubles of my heart | are enlarged;*  
> bring me out of my dis- | tresses.  
> Consider my affliction and my | trouble,*  
> and forgive | all my sins.  
> Oh, guard my soul, and de- | liver me!*  
> Let me not be put to shame, for I take ref- | uge in you.


## Collect

Almighty and everlasting God, increase in us Your gifts of faith, hope, and love that we may receive the forgiveness You have promised and love what You have commanded;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 261 _Lord, Keep Us Steadfast in Thy Word_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 375 _If Thy Beloved Son, O God_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 315 _I Come, O Savior, to Thy Table_st 1-5
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 359 _Christ, Whose Glory Fills the Skies_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, **&ldquo;The man who has done this deserves to die&rdquo;** [(2Sm&nbsp;12:5)](http://www.esvbible.org/2%20Samuel%2012%3A5/).
What have I done for which I deserve to die?

&ldquo;David, you have taken your poor neighbor's only lamb for yourself,
when you had plenty of your own lambs you could have eaten.&rdquo;
That was the prophet Nathan's way of confronting King David with his adultery and murder.
And for quick review for those of you who might need a refresher on this fundamental Bible story,
David was king of Israel and his army was out of town fighting the Ammonites.
King David looked out from his rooftop and saw one of his soldiers' wives, Bathsheba,
bathing on her rooftop. She was very beautiful [(2Sm&nbsp;11:2)](http://www.esvbible.org/2%20Samuel%2011%3A2/).
Right away, David broke the Tenth Commandment: **&ldquo;You shall not covet your neighbor's wife.&rdquo;**
But **put to death &hellip; what is earthly in you: sexual immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is _idolatry_** [(Col&nbsp;3:5 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Colossians+3:5/).
Right off the bat, David was not slipping off into a little bit of covetousness&mdash;tsk, tsk&mdash;he had fallen into full-fledged _idolatry_.
He broke the _First_ Commandment: **&ldquo;You shall have no other gods.&rdquo;**

Things went very bad from there.

**&ldquo;Why have you despised the word of the Lord, to do what is evil in his sight?&rdquo;** [(2Sm&nbsp;12:9)](http://www.esvbible.org/2%20Samuel%2012%3A9).

**&ldquo;I have sinned against the Lord&rdquo;** [(2Sm&nbsp;12:13)](http://www.esvbible.org/2%20Samuel%2012%3A13).

**&ldquo;The Lord also has put away your sin; you shall not die.&rdquo;**

The hearing of faith is different from trying to do better.

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

The Epistle skips [Gal 3:1‑9](http://www.esvbible.org/Galatians%203%3A1-9/):

> **[1] O foolish Galatians! Who has bewitched you? It was before your eyes that Jesus Christ was publicly portrayed as crucified. [2] Let me ask you only this: Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law or by hearing with faith? [3] Are you so foolish? Having begun by the Spirit, are you now being perfected by the flesh? [4] Did you suffer so many things in vain—if indeed it was in vain? [5] Does he who supplies the Spirit to you and works miracles among you do so by works of the law, or by hearing with faith—[6] just as Abraham “believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness”?**

> **[7] Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham. [8] And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying, “In you shall all the nations be blessed.” [9] So then, those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.**

You may want to introduce and emphasize _ακουης πιστεως_: the hearing of faith.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
