<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Palm Sunday

## During the service

* Remind acolyte to blow out the candle lighter.  Do not put it out by pulling the wick back in.
* Rite of Confirmation for Trevon and Lexie. They will wear chrisoms for the rite, but can take them off afterward for Communion.

## Announcements

* Trevon Preston and Alexis Puleo are to be confirmed today.

## Old Testament [Dt 32:36‑39 ESV]

> [36] For the Lord will vindicate his people  
> and have compassion on his servants,  
> when he sees that their power is gone  
> and there is none remaining, bond or free.  
> [37] Then he will say, ‘Where are their gods,  
> the rock in which they took refuge,  
> [38] who ate the fat of their sacrifices  
> and drank the wine of their drink offering?  
> Let them rise up and help you;  
> let them be your protection!  
> [39] “‘See now that I, even I, am he,  
> and there is no god beside me;  
> I kill and I make alive;  
> I wound and I heal;  
> and there is none that can deliver out of my hand.

## Epistle [Php 2:5‑11 ESV; sermon text]

[5] Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, [6] who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, [7] but emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. [8] And being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross. [9] Therefore God has highly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name, [10] so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, [11] and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 22:1‑23 ESV]

[1] Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread drew near, which is called the Passover. [2] And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how to put him to death, for they feared the people.

[3] Then Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve. [4] He went away and conferred with the chief priests and officers how he might betray him to them. [5] And they were glad, and agreed to give him money. [6] So he consented and sought an opportunity to betray him to them in the absence of a crowd.

[7] Then came the day of Unleavened Bread, on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed. [8] So Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat it.” [9] They said to him, “Where will you have us prepare it?” [10] He said to them, “Behold, when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters [11] and tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’ [12] And he will show you a large upper room furnished; prepare it there.” [13] And they went and found it just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.

[14] And when the hour came, he reclined at table, and the apostles with him. [15] And he said to them, “I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. [16] For I tell you I will not eat it until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.” [17] And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he said, “Take this, and divide it among yourselves. [18] For I tell you that from now on I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.” [19] And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” [20] And likewise the cup after they had eaten, saying, “This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood. [21] But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table. [22] For the Son of Man goes as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed!” [23] And they began to question one another, which of them it could be who was going to do this.


## Introit [Ps 24:7-10; antiphon: Ps 118:26]

> Blessèd is he who comes in the name | of the LORD!*  
> We bless you from the house | of the LORD.  
> Lift up your heads, O gates! And be lifted up, O | ancient doors,*  
> that the King of glory | may come in.  
> Who is this King of | glory?*  
> The LORD, strong and mighty, the LORD, mighty in | battle!  
> Lift up your heads, O gates! And lift them up, O | ancient doors,*  
> that the King of glory | may come in.  
> Who is this King of | glory?*  
> The LORD of hosts, he is the King of| glory!  
> Blessèd is he who comes in the name | of the LORD!*  
> We bless you from the house | of the LORD.

## Collect

Almighty and everlasting God, You sent Your Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon Himself our flesh and to suffer death upon the cross. Mercifully grant that we may follow the example of His great humility and patience and be made partakers of His resurrection; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 160 _All Glory, Laud, and Honor_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 161 _Hosanna, Loud Hosanna_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 150 _Lord Jesus, Thou art Going Forth_ as many stzs as time permits
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 162 _Ride On, Ride On_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, do you know God?
This is a personal question: Do you know God? And I believe that you do.
I can *guarantee* that He knows you, for Christ has told us **“Even the hairs of your head are all numbered”** [(Lk 12:7)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke+12:7/).
God knows you in detail. But do you know *this* about God?

> **“See now that I, even I, am he,**  
> **and there is no god beside me;**  
> **I kill and I make alive;**  
> **I wound and I heal;**  
> **and there is none that can deliver out of my hand.”** [(Dt 32:39)](http://www.esvbible.org/Deuteronomy%2032%3A39/)

I suppose that there are some who would say they know God but would disagree with that—that God kills and wounds.
But they would agree with this statement: **God is love** [(1Jn 4:8)](http://www.esvbible.org/1+John+4:8/).
Yet **“I kill and I make alive; I wound and I heal”** are straight out of God's mouth and are recorded in our Old Testament reading.
So we must either let His Word stand or invent for ourselves a God other than the God of the Bible.

When, then, does God kill and wound? He kills and wounds to punish sin, of course.

> The Lord kills and wounds so that sinners *blinded by pride* might see the reality that they are wounded and dead in their sin … that they might see the reality that they are wounded and dead in their sin and trust the Lord, who alone heals and makes alive.<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

You and I are the sinners blinded by pride.
I asked you if you knew God.
Well, if you know God, I might as well ask you, “When did God ever kill or wound you?
When did God ever knock the pride out of you that you would see that you were wounded and dead in your sin?”
Thank you, Lord, for wounding and killing me to knock the sin out of me!
Yes, Lord, and please do not stop!

But the hymn we have not yet sung is very good news to me:

> *Ride on, ride on, in majesty!*  
> *In lowly pomp ride on to die.*

Jesus rides into Jerusalem in the most humble parade ever—Jesus comes to do the real dying.
The Lord may kill and wound me, but He is more resolved to make me alive and to heal me _by His own death_. And here He comes to die for me.
This is the most humble parade ever—Jesus coming into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday.
He has resolved not to kill and wound me, that I would die eternally.
He has resolved to be killed Himself _in my place_, that He might make me alive and heal me.
God Himself has resolved in eternity to be killed Himself in my place that I might be alive and healed of my sin.

> **Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. And being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross. Therefore God has highly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name, so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.**

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

But God says that to kill and to wound is His *alien work* [(Is 28:21)](http://www.esvbible.org/Isaiah%2028%3A21/).

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
*FC SD* VI 12
