<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Lenten midweek (First Petition of the Lord's Prayer)

## Announcements

## Psalmody [Ps 138 ESV; sermon text]

> I give you thanks, O LORD, with | my whole heart;*  
> before the gods I | sing your praise;  
> I bow down toward your holy temple and give thanks to your name for your steadfast love and your | faithfulness,*  
> for you have exalted above all things your name | and your word.  
> On the day I called, you | answered me;*  
> my strength of soul | you increased.
> All the kings of the earth shall give you thanks, | O LORD,*  
> for they have heard the words | of your mouth,  
> and they shall sing of the ways | of the LORD,*  
> for great is the glory | of the LORD.  
> For though the LORD is high, he regards the | lowly,*  
> but the haughty he knows | from afar.  
> Though I walk in the midst of trouble, you pre- | serve my life;*  
> you stretch out your hand against the wrath of my enemies, and your right hand de- | livers me.  
> The LORD will fulfill his pur- | pose for me;*  
> your steadfast love, O LORD, endures forever. Do not forsake the work | of your hands.

## Passion story [Lk 22:1‑23 ESV]

[1] Now the Feast of Unleavened Bread drew near, which is called the Passover. [2] And the chief priests and the scribes were seeking how to put [Jesus] to death, for they feared the people.

[3] Then Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve. [4] He went away and conferred with the chief priests and officers how he might betray him to them. [5] And they were glad, and agreed to give him money. [6] So he consented and sought an opportunity to betray him to them in the absence of a crowd.

[7] Then came the day of Unleavened Bread, on which the Passover lamb had to be sacrificed. [8] So Jesus sent Peter and John, saying, “Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat it.” [9] They said to him, “Where will you have us prepare it?” [10] He said to them, “Behold, when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet you. Follow him into the house that he enters [11] and tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says to you, Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?’ [12] And he will show you a large upper room furnished; prepare it there.” [13] And they went and found it just as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.

[14] And when the hour came, he reclined at table, and the apostles with him. [15] And he said to them, “I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer. [16] For I tell you I will not eat it until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.” [17] And he took a cup, and when he had given thanks he said, “Take this, and divide it among yourselves. [18] For I tell you that from now on I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.” [19] And he took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to them, saying, “This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in remembrance of me.” [20] And likewise the cup after they had eaten, saying, “This cup that is poured out for you is the new covenant in my blood. [21] But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table. [22] For the Son of Man goes as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed!” [23] And they began to question one another, which of them it could be who was going to do this.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 155 _Sweet the Moments, Rich in Blessing_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 458 _Our Father, Thou in Heaven Above_, st 1-2
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 552 _Abide with Me_ st 1,2, 6-8

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, **“Our Father who art in heaven, …** _[Pause]_ **hallowed be Thy name.”**
When we pray the Lord's Prayer, the First Petition is **“Hallowed be Thy name.”**

> _What does this mean?_ God's name is certainly holy in itself, but we pray in this petition that it would be kept holy among us also.

> _How is God's name kept holy?_ God's name is kept holy when the Word of God is taught in its truth and purity, and we, as the children of God, also lead holy lives according to it.
Help us to do this, dear Father in heaven!
But anyone who teaches or lives contrary to God's Word profanes the name of God among us.
Protect us from this, heavenly Father!

That is how we learned it in the Catechism. Luther teaches that keeping God's name holy means living according to the Word of God. God's Word and God's name—they are inseperable.
“It says so in the Catechism, but where is it in the Bible?”
Beloved in the Lord, turn to this evening's psalm, Psalm 138, which we read responsively.

> **I give you thanks, O LORD, with my whole heart;**  
> **before the gods I sing your praise;**  
> **I bow down toward your holy temple and give thanks to your name for your steadfast love and your faithfulness,**  
> **for you have exalted above all things your name and your word.**

<center>FOR YOU HAVE EXALTED ABOVE ALL THINGS _YOUR NAME AND YOUR WORD_.</center>

Psalm 138 is a prayer itself, and it begins by thanking God with your whole heart.
It continues with these words: **“Before the gods I sing your praise.”**
This is another way of saying, “There are no other gods but You, O Lord, the God of Israel.”
Now the next verse: **“I bow down toward your holy temple and give thanks to your name for your steadfast love and your faithfulness.”**
Do we, as Christians, bow down to the holy temple in Jerusalem? No, we do not.
First of all, there is no temple in Jerusalem anymore, but even if were rebuilt, we would not bow down toward it like the Jews did in Old Testament days.

The Old Testament temple was build by King Solomon, who had this to day when the temple
was consecrated in Jerusalem:
**“That your eyes[, O LORD,] may be open night and day toward this house, the place of which you have said, ‘_My name shall be there_,’ that you may listen to the prayer that your servant offers _toward this place_. And listen to the plea of your servant and of your people Israel, when they _pray toward this place_. And listen in heaven your dwelling place, and when you hear, forgive”** [(1Ki 8:29‑30 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/1%20Kings%208%3A29-30/).
God's glory dwelt in the temple above the ark of the covenant, in the Most Holy Place.
But even here, it is written that heaven is God's dwelling place.
Nevertheless, God was known to be in the temple;
another way of saying it is “God's _name_ was in the temple.”
And when He taught the people to pray to His name, He taught them to _pray toward the temple_.
That is why Psalm 138 says, **“I bow down toward your holy temple.”**

And now,

<center>FOR YOU HAVE EXALTED ABOVE ALL THINGS YOUR NAME AND YOUR WORD.</center>

There it is—Psalm 138, verse 2—_God's name is inseperable from His Word_, as you learned in the Catechism.
When we pray the First Petition, **“Hallowed be Thy name,”** we pray, first of all, that God would teach us His Word that we would know something about Him—that we would know His name.

For example, “Do you know Boris?”

“I don't know him. I never talked to him.”

But if I had talked to him, I could say that I have at least _begun_ to know him.
I would know little about Boris if I never talked to him.
How could I say I know him if I did not know what he said? It makes sense.
God has caused His Word to be revealed in writing through the prophets, apostles, and evangelists.
He has spoken in the Bible, and by listening to His Word, you have begun to know Him—you have begun to know His name.

Knowing God's name by knowing His Word is one thing. When God's name was in the temple in Jerusalem, what did He expect those who believe in Him to do?
This is another thing.
God expected the people to _pray to Him_—to pray to His name—to pray toward the temple in Jerusalem.
Beloved in the Lord, _God expects you to pray._

When Jesus teaches you to pray, He says,

> **“When you pray, do not heap up empty phrases as the Gentiles do, for they think that they will be heard for their many words. Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him. Pray then like this: “Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name.”** [(Mt 6:7‑9 ESV, with KJV mixed in)](http://www.esvbible.org/Matthew%206%3A7-9/)

Some would take this to mean, “Jesus doesn't want me to pray,” or “Leave the praying to those who know how to pray.” No, Jesus says, **“When you pray.”** Not _if_—_when you pray_.
But He does not want you to pile on words in your prayers because He already knows what you need. And He _does_ say, **“Pray then like this.”** Again, _God expects you to pray._ **“Our Father who art in heaven.”**
The main difference Old Testament prayer and Christian prayer today is that you direct your prayer to your Father in heaven with no pointing your face to Jerusalem.

For God's name is no longer in Jerusalem, but has been put _on you_ when you were baptized!
You are His dear child, redeemed by Jesus and baptized in His name.
Pray directly to your Father in heaven.

But pay closest attention to His Word, when you pray and even when you do not. Pay close attention to His Word, and trust it fully, and you will keep His name holy.

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>FOR YOU HAVE EXALTED ABOVE ALL THINGS YOUR NAME AND YOUR WORD.</center>

1. God's name and His Word are inseperable.
1. God's name and prayer are inseperable.
    1. 1Ki 8:29‑30. Pray to the temple.
    1. Mt 6:7‑9. Do no pray like a hypocrite, but **“_Pray then like this_: Our Father who art in heaven.”**
        1. Command to pray
        1. We do not pray to the temple, we pray directly to our Father.
    
## Notes



## Footnotes


