<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Lenten midweek (Second Petition of the Lord's Prayer)

## Announcements

* Lou Ferencik was buried today with a Marine honor guard.

## Psalmody [Ps 147 ESV; sermon text]

> [1] Praise the LORD! For it is good to sing praises | to our God;*  
> for it is pleasant, and a song of praise is | fitting.  
> [2] The LORD builds up Je- | rusalem;*  
> he gathers the outcasts of | Israel.  
> [3] He heals the broken- | hearted*  
> and binds | up their wounds.  
> [4] He determines the number | of the stars;*  
> he gives to all of | them their names.  
> [5] Great is our Lord, and abun- | dant in power;*  
> his understanding is beyond | measure.  
> [6] The LORD lifts up the | humble;*  
> he casts the wicked | to the ground.  
> [7] Sing to the LORD with thanks- | giving;*  
> make melody to our God | on the lyre!  
> [8] He covers the heavens with clouds;  
> he prepares rain | for the earth;*  
> he makes grass grow | on the hills.  
> [9] He gives to the | beasts their food,*  
> and to the young ravens | that cry.  
> [10] His delight is not in the strength | of the horse,*  
> nor his pleasure in the legs | of a man,  
> [11] but the LORD takes pleasure in those who | fear him,*  
> in those who hope in his | steadfast love.  
> [12] Praise the LORD, O Je- | rusalem!*  
> Praise your God, O | Zion!  
> [13] For he strengthens the bars | of your gates;*  
> he blesses your children with- | in you.  
> [14] He makes peace in your | borders;*  
> he fills you with the finest | of the wheat.  
> [15] He sends out his command | to the earth;*  
> his word runs | swiftly.  
> [16] He gives | snow like wool;*  
> he scatters frost like | ashes.  
> [17] He hurls down his crystals of | ice like crumbs;*  
> who can stand be- | fore his cold?  
> [18] He sends out his word, and | melts them;*  
> he makes his wind blow and the | waters flow.  
> [19] He declares his word to | Jacob,*  
> his statutes and rules to | Israel.  
> [20] He has not dealt thus with any other | nation;*  
> they do not know his rules. | Praise the LORD!


## Passion story, Part 3 [Lk 22:47-71 ESV]

[47] While [Jesus] was still speaking, there came a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He drew near to Jesus to kiss him, [48] but Jesus said to him, “Judas, would you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?” [49] And when those who were around him saw what would follow, they said, “Lord, shall we strike with the sword?” [50] And one of them struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his right ear. [51] But Jesus said, “No more of this!” And he touched his ear and healed him. [52] Then Jesus said to the chief priests and officers of the temple and elders, who had come out against him, “Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs? [53] When I was with you day after day in the temple, you did not lay hands on me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness.”
[54] Then they seized him and led him away, bringing him into the high priest's house, and Peter was following at a distance. [55] And when they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat down together, Peter sat down among them. [56] Then a servant girl, seeing him as he sat in the light and looking closely at him, said, “This man also was with him.” [57] But he denied it, saying, “Woman, I do not know him.” [58] And a little later someone else saw him and said, “You also are one of them.” But Peter said, “Man, I am not.” [59] And after an interval of about an hour still another insisted, saying, “Certainly this man also was with him, for he too is a Galilean.” [60] But Peter said, “Man, I do not know what you are talking about.” And immediately, while he was still speaking, the rooster crowed. [61] And the Lord turned and looked at Peter. And Peter remembered the saying of the Lord, how he had said to him, “Before the rooster crows today, you will deny me three times.” [62] And he went out and wept bitterly.
[63] Now the men who were holding Jesus in custody were mocking him as they beat him. [64] They also blindfolded him and kept asking him, “Prophesy! Who is it that struck you?” [65] And they said many other things against him, blaspheming him.
[66] When day came, the assembly of the elders of the people gathered together, both chief priests and scribes. And they led him away to their council, and they said, [67] “If you are the Christ, tell us.” But he said to them, “If I tell you, you will not believe, [68] and if I ask you, you will not answer. [69] But from now on the Son of Man shall be seated at the right hand of the power of God.” [70] So they all said, “Are you the Son of God, then?” And he said to them, “You say that I am.” [71] Then they said, “What further testimony do we need? We have heard it ourselves from his own lips.”

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 148 _Lord Jesus Christ, My Life, My Light_, st 1-4
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 458 _Our Father, Thou in Heaven Above_, st 1-3
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 148 _Lord Jesus Christ, My Life, My Light_ st 5-8

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, **“Our Father who art in heaven, … hallowed be Thy name. … Thy kingdom come.”**
The Second Petition of the Lord's Prayer is **“Thy kingdom come.”**

> _How does God's kingdom come?_ God's kingdom comes when our heavenly Father
gives us His Holy Spirit, so that by His grace
we believe His holy Word and lead godly lives here in time and there in eternity.

<center>GOD'S KINGDOM COMES WHEN HIS WORD GOES OUT.</center>

Consider the power of words in your life.
If no one ever told you anything, what would you think?
I think I would be a savage.
If I never heard anything—not even by sign language—if no words of any kind had entered my mind, then the only thing that would have entered my mind would be how my body feels.
I would be a savage who lived for nothing other than to make my body feel good;
that would be my state of mind.
Now imagine what I would be doing all day if all I cared about was how my body felt—it is not a pretty picture.
Shall we do an experiment? Are there any volunteers?

God forbid that the experiment ever be done, but I believe that if from conception I never heard a word, not even in the womb, my flesh would simply take over,
and my behavior would be like what we read about the demon-possessed people in the Bible.
Now that I think about it, I think I _would_ be demon-possessed.
Such is the power of the absence of words.

But if I were told things, I would have heard something, and I would be a different person.
_[Illustration]_ Years ago I visited the old country and spoke with my mother's cousin Liidi.
As a child, she believed Joseph Stalin loved children more than anyone else
_because that was what she was taught in school_.
As a child, I believed that man evolved from monkeys _because that was what I was taught in school_.
You have got to be careful about which words you listen to,
and the point is this: the words we listen to become who we are.
Thank God I had a mother who told me to be nice to other people
and to apologize when I did wrong.
But as the words we listen to become who we are, we must be concerned about
_which words we listen to_.

I could talk about the quality of words, but God's Word has revealed to us
that it all boils down to God speaks truth—that Jesus _is_ the truth [(Jn 14:6)](http://www.esvbible.org/John+14:6/)—and that Satan is the father of lies [(Jn 8:44)](http://www.esvbible.org/John+14:6/).
The lies lead only to sin and death; the Word of God leads to life.

The clearest pattern of truth is Law and Gospel.
God's Word goes out when we proclaim the Gospel of the forgiveness of sins in the name of Jesus Christ.
Preach the Gospel, preach the Gospel, preach the Gospel.
And the truth is that if the Gospel were not preached, no one would be saved.
But who is able to hear the Gospel?
Only terrified sinners. Then the Gospel comforts.

AMEN.

## Outline

    
## Notes


## Footnotes

