<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Lenten midweek (First Petition of the Lord's Prayer)

## Psalmody [Ps 66 ESV; sermon text]

> [1] Shout for joy to God, | all the earth;*  
> [2] 	sing the glory of his name; give to him | glorious praise!  
> [3] Say to God, “How awesome | are your deeds!*  
> So great is your power that your enemies come cringing | to you.  
> [4] All the earth worships you and sings prais- | es to you;*  
> they sing praises | to your name.”  
> [5] Come and see what | God has done:*  
> he is awesome in his deeds toward the chil- | dren of man.  
> [6] He turned the sea into | dry land;*  
> they passed through the riv- | er on foot.  
> There did we rejoice in him, [7] who rules by his might forever, whose eyes keep watch on the | nations—*  
> let not the rebellious ex- | alt themselves.  
> [8] Bless our God, O | peoples;*  
> let the sound of his | praise be heard,  
> [9] who has kept our soul among the | living*  
> and has not let our | feet slip.  
> [10] For you, O God, have | tested us;*  
> you have tried us as sil- | ver is tried.  
> [11] You brought us in- | to the net;*  
> you laid a crushing burden | on our backs;  
> [12] you let men ride o- | ver our heads;*  
> we went through fire and through water; yet you have brought us out to a place of a- | bundance.  
> [13] I will come into your house with burnt | offerings;*  
> I will perform my | vows to you,  
> [14] that which my lips | uttered*  
> and my mouth promised when I was in | trouble.  
> [15] I will offer to you burnt offerings of fattened animals, with the smoke of the sacri- | fice of rams;*  
> I will make an offering of | bulls and goats.  
> [16] Come and hear, all you who | fear God,*  
> and I will tell what he has done | for my soul.  
> [17] I cried to him | with my mouth,*  
> and high praise was | on my tongue.  
> [18] If I had cherished iniquity | in my heart,*  
> the Lord would not have | listened.  
> [19] But truly God has | listened;*  
> he has attended to the voice | of my prayer.  
> [20] Blessèd | be God,*  
> because he has not rejected my prayer or removed his steadfast | love from me!

## Passion story, Part 2 [Lk 22:24‑46 ESV]

[24] A dispute also arose among them, as to which of them was to be regarded as the greatest. [25] And he said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and those in authority over them are called benefactors. [26] But not so with you. Rather, let the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the leader as one who serves. [27] For who is the greater, one who reclines at table or one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines at table? But I am among you as the one who serves.

[28] “You are those who have stayed with me in my trials, [29] and I assign to you, as my Father assigned to me, a kingdom, [30] that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

[31] “Simon, Simon, behold, Satan demanded to have you, that he might sift you like wheat, [32] but I have prayed for you that your faith may not fail. And when you have turned again, strengthen your brothers.” [33] Peter said to him, “Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death.” [34] Jesus said, “I tell you, Peter, the rooster will not crow this day, until you deny three times that you know me.”

[35] And he said to them, “When I sent you out with no moneybag or knapsack or sandals, did you lack anything?” They said, “Nothing.” [36] He said to them, “But now let the one who has a moneybag take it, and likewise a knapsack. And let the one who has no sword sell his cloak and buy one. [37] For I tell you that this Scripture must be fulfilled in me: ‘And he was numbered with the transgressors.’ For what is written about me has its fulfillment.” [38] And they said, “Look, Lord, here are two swords.” And he said to them, “It is enough.”


[39] And he came out and went, as was his custom, to the Mount of Olives, and the disciples followed him. [40] And when he came to the place, he said to them, “Pray that you may not enter into temptation.” [41] And he withdrew from them about a stone's throw, and knelt down and prayed, [42] saying, “Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done.” [43] And there appeared to him an angel from heaven, strengthening him. [44] And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat became like great drops of blood falling down to the ground. [45] And when he rose from prayer, he came to the disciples and found them sleeping for sorrow, [46] and he said to them, “Why are you sleeping? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation.”

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 154 _Alas! and Did My Savior Bleed_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 458 _Our Father, Thou in Heaven Above_, st 1-2
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 552 _Abide with Me! Fast Falls the Eventide stanzas_ st 1-2, 6-8

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, **“Our Father who art in heaven, … hallowed be Thy name.”**
Before we move on to the Second Petition, let us stay with the First Petition for one more midweek service: **“Hallowed be Thy name.”**
Last week, I made two main points about praying, **“Hallowed be Thy name”**:

1. God's name and God's Word are inseparable: they go together.
1. When you know God's name, you call upon it: you pray. To the believer, _praying is breathing_—it is what you do.

Now we pick up from there.

> _How is God's name kept holy?_ God's name is kept holy when the Word of God is taught in its truth and purity, and we, as the children of God, also lead holy lives according to it.
Help us to do this, dear Father in heaven!
But anyone who teaches or lives contrary to God's Word profanes the name of God among us.
Protect us from this, heavenly Father!

And it is this last point that we take quite seriously: _But anyone who teaches or lives contrary to God's Word profanes the name of God among us.
Protect us from this, heavenly Father!_
Satan's lies and the world's priorities are, unfortunately, effective against our flesh
so that we teach and live contrary to God's Word.
This can and does interfere with our prayers.

The Bible clearly teaches us that God hears and answers our prayers, but the Bible also teaches that our sin affects God's disposition toward our prayers, as we heard in the psalm tonight: **“If I had cherished iniquity in my heart, the Lord _would not have listened_.”**
Our Lenten warning tonight, beloved in the Lord, is this: _Do not cherish iniquity in your heart._
For it is also written in Psalm 80, **“O LORD God of hosts, how long will you be angry with your people's prayers?”** [(Ps 80:4 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Psalm%2080%3A4/).
It is written, then, that He is angry with our prayers when we cherish sin in our hearts.
O Lord, grant us Your Holy Spirit _not_ to cherish sin in our hearts and that our prayers not anger You!

But I would also say that God hears and answers all of our prays _in love_. When we cherish sin in our hearts, He hears our prayers in anger and disciplines us through suffering—an opportunity to repent for which we should be thankful.
I pray that you are able to hear this with a thankful heart:
When you pray and your prayer is answered with suffering, God has still heard and answered your prayer in love.
God forbid, but you may be cherishing a sin in your heart—a grudge, or idolatry perhaps—of which you must repent.
Or God may just be purifying you like silver that you would trust in Him even when times are bad, and He will deliver you.

We just finished watching “The Ten Commandments” movie before the soup supper.
There we see—and can read for ourselves from the Bible—that God delivered the Israelites from slavery in Egypt.
The suffering and toil of Egyptian slavery was terrible, but God raised up Moses and through him delivered them all from slavery.
This is what is referred to in Psalm 66:

> **Come and see what God has done:**  
> **he is awesome in his deeds toward the children of man.**  
> **He turned the sea into dry land;**  
> **they passed through the river on foot.**  
> **There did we rejoice in him, who rules by his might forever, whose eyes keep watch on the nations—**  
> **let not the rebellious exalt themselves.**

As the Lord delivered the Isralites from slavery to Egypt, so has Jesus delivered you from slavery to Satan and sin.
This faith alone overthrows cherishing sin in our hearts—Jesus, our Deliverer—Jesus, our Redeemer from sin, Satan, death, and hell.
_By faith in Him, all our prayers please God_, and He has promised, **“If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, ask whatever you wish, and it will be done for you”** [(Jn 15:7 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/John%2015%3A7/). AMEN.

## Outline

    
## Notes



## Footnotes

