<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Lenten midweek (Third Petition of the Lord's Prayer)

## Announcements

* Pray for Verna.

## Psalmody [Ps 94 ESV; sermon text]

> [1] O LORD, God of vengeance,  
> O God of vengeance, shine forth!  
> [2] Rise up, O judge of the earth;  
> repay to the proud what they deserve!  
> [3] O LORD, how long shall the wicked,  
> how long shall the wicked exult?  
> [4] They pour out their arrogant words;  
> all the evildoers boast.  
> [5] They crush your people, O LORD,  
> and afflict your heritage.  
> [6] They kill the widow and the sojourner,  
> and murder the fatherless;  
> [7] and they say, “The LORD does not see;  
> the God of Jacob does not perceive.”
	
> [8] Understand, O dullest of the people!  
> Fools, when will you be wise?  
> [9] He who planted the ear, does he not hear?  
> He who formed the eye, does he not see?  
> [10] He who disciplines the nations, does he not rebuke?  
> He who teaches man knowledge—  
> [11] the LORD—knows the thoughts of man,  
> that they are but a breath.

> [12] Blessed is the man whom you discipline, O LORD,  
> and whom you teach out of your law,  
> [13] to give him rest from days of trouble,  
> until a pit is dug for the wicked.  
> [14] For the LORD will not forsake his people;  
> he will not abandon his heritage;  
> [15] for justice will return to the righteous,  
> and all the upright in heart will follow it.

> [16] Who rises up for me against the wicked?  
> Who stands up for me against evildoers?  
> [17] If the LORD had not been my help,  
> my soul would soon have lived in the land of silence.  
> [18] When I thought, “My foot slips,”  
> your steadfast love, O LORD, held me up.  
> [19] When the cares of my heart are many,  
> your consolations cheer my soul.  
> [20] Can wicked rulers be allied with you,  
> those who frame injustice by statute?  
> [21] They band together against the life of the righteous  
> and condemn the innocent to death.  
> [22] But the LORD has become my stronghold,  
> and my God the rock of my refuge.  
> [23] He will bring back on them their iniquity  
> and wipe them out for their wickedness;  
> the LORD our God will wipe them out.

## Passion story, Part 4 [Lk 23:1-25 ESV]

[1] Then the whole company of them arose and brought [Jesus] before Pilate. [2] And they began to accuse him, saying, “We found this man misleading our nation and forbidding us to give tribute to Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ, a king.” [3] And Pilate asked him, “Are you the King of the Jews?” And he answered him, “You have said so.” [4] Then Pilate said to the chief priests and the crowds, “I find no guilt in this man.” [5] But they were urgent, saying, “He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, from Galilee even to this place.”
[6] When Pilate heard this, he asked whether the man was a Galilean. [7] And when he learned that he belonged to Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him over to Herod, who was himself in Jerusalem at that time. [8] When Herod saw Jesus, he was very glad, for he had long desired to see him, because he had heard about him, and he was hoping to see some sign done by him. [9] So he questioned him at some length, but he made no answer. [10] The chief priests and the scribes stood by, vehemently accusing him. [11] And Herod with his soldiers treated him with contempt and mocked him. Then, arraying him in splendid clothing, he sent him back to Pilate. [12] And Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very day, for before this they had been at enmity with each other.

[13] Pilate then called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people, [14] and said to them, “You brought me this man as one who was misleading the people. And after examining him before you, behold, I did not find this man guilty of any of your charges against him. [15] Neither did Herod, for he sent him back to us. Look, nothing deserving death has been done by him. [16] I will therefore punish and release him.”

[18] But they all cried out together, “Away with this man, and release to us Barabbas”— [19] a man who had been thrown into prison for an insurrection started in the city and for murder. [20] Pilate addressed them once more, desiring to release Jesus, [21] but they kept shouting, “Crucify, crucify him!” [22] A third time he said to them, “Why, what evil has he done? I have found in him no guilt deserving death. I will therefore punish and release him.” [23] But they were urgent, demanding with loud cries that he should be crucified. And their voices prevailed. [24] So Pilate decided that their demand should be granted. [25] He released the man who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, for whom they asked, but he delivered Jesus over to their will.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 141 _Enslaved by Sin and Bound in Chains_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 458 _Our Father, Thou in Heaven Above_, st 1‑4
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 552 _Abide with Me! Fast Falls the Eventide_ st 1-2, 6-8

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, **“Our Father who art in heaven, … hallowed be Thy name. … Thy kingdom come.”**
The Third Petition of the Lord's Prayer is **“Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.”** This petition is so famous that it is just as well remembered by its short form, simply, **“Thy will be done.”**

> _How is this done?_ When God breaks and hinders every evil counsel and will which would not let us hallow God's name nor let His kingdom come, such as the will of the devil, the world, and our flesh; but strengthens and preserves us steadfast in His Word and faith unto our end. This is His good and gracious will.<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

We have this petition because the will of the devil is always against God and we are praying that _God's_ will be done.
If you believe there is no devil, you need not pray, **“[God's] will be done,”** for if there is no devil, there is no one to incite us against God's will.
But as you know, Satan is real.
Satan first troubled us as the ancient serpent in the Garden of Eden [(Rv 12:9)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation%2012%3A9/).
Now look at who are the _allies_ of the devil, or should I say _pawns_ of the devil: _the world and our flesh_ are the pawns of the devil.
In other words, the devil attacks us daily through _what we deal with every day_.

We deal with our flesh. We deal with our flesh every day. How does the devil influence our flesh?
All the things that are scandalous and inappropriate to talk about, so I will not talk about those.
But the devil's influence on our flesh has produced fantastic results.
All we can do is repent and pray, **“[Father,] Thy will be done.”**
For Jesus has purchased us to be His own, that we may do the Father's good and gracious will, not the devil's will.

We deal with the world. We deal with the world every day. The devil wants us to be dissatisfied with our place in the world so that we rebel against God's good and gracious will.
Let us turn to tonight's psalm:

> **O LORD, how long shall the wicked,**  
> **how long shall the wicked exult?**  
> **They pour out their arrogant words;**  
> **all the evildoers boast.**  
> **They crush your people, O LORD,**  
> **and afflict your heritage.**  
> **They kill the widow and the sojourner,**  
> **and murder the fatherless;**  
> **and they say, “The LORD does not see;**  
> **the God of Jacob does not perceive.”**

And that is where the powerful and violent of the world are mistaken: the LORD _does_ see, the God of Jacob _does_ perceive.
Nevertheless, Satan does, through deception, raise up his children to kill the widow and the sojourner, and murder the fatherless.
There is the Biblical sign by which you can discern between godly and ungodly earthly power: are the helpless helped or are they destroyed?

Satan raises up worldy leaders through deceptions.
Twenty five years ago or so, I read a newspaper article that asked successful people—worldly leaders—if they had ever cheated at school.
Though I believe that according to the survey, the majority had not, I recalll that about 40% _had_ cheated in school.
According to those who took the survey and said they cheated, some remarked along the lines, “I've worked hard for my success, and I deserve it.”
So there is a little picture of how Satan operates through our flesh to deceive and to draw us into the world in a way that appears successful but makes us enemies of God.

You do not want to be an enemy of God.

> **He will bring back on them their iniquity**  
> **and wipe them out for their wickedness;**  
> **the LORD our God will wipe them out.**

Satan's influence is undone by the Holy Spirit working through God's Word alone. And remember that Jesus is the Word of God made flesh.
It is one thing for Him so _say_ we are forgiven,
but it is another thing altogether for Him to take on our weak human flesh,
be tempted without sin, and then be crucified and die in punishment for our sin.
He is the One through whom God's good and gracious will is done in our lives. AMEN.

## Outline

    
## Notes


## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
Taken from the 1943 Concordia catechism
