<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Lenten midweek (Fourth Petition of the Lord's Prayer)

## During the service

* Remain seated for the singing of the hymns

## Announcements

* Verna Steinbrenner's condition has improved. I saw her yesterday.
* Holy Week schedule

## Psalmody [Ps 104 ESV; sermon text]

> Bless the LORD, | O my soul!*  
> O LORD my God, you are | very great!  
> You are clothed with splendor and | majesty,*  
> covering yourself with light as with a garment, stretching out the heavens | like a tent.  
> He lays the beams of his chambers on the | waters;*  
> he makes the clouds his chariot; he rides on the wings | of the wind;*  
> he makes his mes- | sengers winds,*  
> his ministers a | flaming fire.  
> He set the earth on its foun- | dations,*  
> so that it should nev- | er be moved.  
> You covered it with the deep as with a | garment;*  
> the waters stood above the | mountains.  
> At your re- | buke they fled;*  
> at the sound of your thunder they | took to flight.  
> The mountains rose, the valleys | sank down*  
> to the place that you appoint- | ed for them.  
> You set a boundary that they | may not pass,*  
> so that they might not again cov- | er the earth.  
> You make springs gush forth in the | valleys;*  
> they flow be- | tween the hills;  
> they give drink to every beast | of the field;*  
> the wild donkeys | quench their thirst.  
> Beside them the birds of the | heavens dwell;*  
> they sing among the | branches.  
> From your lofty abode you water the | mountains;  
> the earth is satisfied with the fruit | of your work.  
> You cause the grass to grow for the livestock and plants for man to | cultivate,*  
> that he may bring forth food from the earth and wine to gladden the | heart of man,  
> oil to make his | face shine*  
> and bread to strengthen | man's heart.  
> The trees of the LORD are watered a- | bundantly,*  
> the cedars of Lebanon that he | planted.  
> In them the birds | build their nests;*
> the stork has her home in the | fir trees.  
> The high mountains are for the | wild goats;*  
> the rocks are a refuge for the rock | badgers.  
> He made the moon to mark the | seasons;*  
> the sun knows its time for | setting.  
> You make darkness, and | it is night,*  
> when all the beasts of the forest | creep about.  
> The young lions roar | for their prey,*  
> seeking their | food from God.  
> When the sun rises, they | steal away*  
> and lie down | in their dens.  
> Man goes out | to his work*  
> and to his labor until the | evening.  
> O LORD, how manifold are your works!  
> In wisdom have you | made them all;*  
> the earth is full of your | creatures.  
> Here is the sea, | great and wide,*   
> which teems with creatures innumerable,  
> living things both | small and great.  
> There | go the ships,*  
> and Leviathan, which you formed to | play in it.  
> These all | look to you,*  
> to give them their food in due | season.  
> When you give it to them, they gath- | er it up;*  
> when you open your hand, they are filled with | good things.  
> When you hide your face, they | are dismayed;*  
> when you take away their breath, they die  
> and return | to their dust.  
> When you send forth your Spirit, they are cre- | ated,*  
> and you renew the face | of the ground.  
> May the glory of the LORD endure for- | ever;*  
> may the LORD rejoice | in his works,  
> who looks on the earth and it | trembles,*  
> who touches the mountains | and they smoke!  
> I will sing to the LORD as long | as I live;*  
> I will sing praise to my God while I have | being.  
> May my meditation be pleas- | ing to him,*  
> for I rejoice | in the LORD.  
> Let sinners be consumed from the earth,  
> and let the wicked | be no more!*  
> Bless the LORD, O my soul! |  
> Praise the LORD!

## Passion story, Part 5 [Lk 23:26-56 ESV]

[26] And as they led him away, they seized one Simon of Cyrene, who was coming in from the country, and laid on him the cross, to carry it behind Jesus. [27] And there followed him a great multitude of the people and of women who were mourning and lamenting for him. [28] But turning to them Jesus said, “Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children. [29] For behold, the days are coming when they will say, ‘Blessed are the barren and the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!’ [30] Then they will begin to say to the mountains, ‘Fall on us,’ and to the hills, ‘Cover us.’ [31] For if they do these things when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?”

[32] Two others, who were criminals, were led away to be put to death with him. [33] And when they came to the place that is called The Skull, there they crucified him, and the criminals, one on his right and one on his left. [34] And Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” And they cast lots to divide his garments. [35] And the people stood by, watching, but the rulers scoffed at him, saying, “He saved others; let him save himself, if he is the Christ of God, his Chosen One!” [36] The soldiers also mocked him, coming up and offering him sour wine [37] and saying, “If you are the King of the Jews, save yourself!” [38] There was also an inscription over him, “This is the King of the Jews.”

[39] One of the criminals who were hanged railed at him, saying, “Are you not the Christ? Save yourself and us!” [40] But the other rebuked him, saying, “Do you not fear God, since you are under the same sentence of condemnation? [41] And we indeed justly, for we are receiving the due reward of our deeds; but this man has done nothing wrong.” [42] And he said, “Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom.” [43] And he said to him, “Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in Paradise.”

[44] It was now about the sixth hour, and there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour, [45] while the sun's light failed. And the curtain of the temple was torn in two. [46] Then Jesus, calling out with a loud voice, said, “Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!” And having said this he breathed his last. [47] Now when the centurion saw what had taken place, he praised God, saying, “Certainly this man was innocent!” [48] And all the crowds that had assembled for this spectacle, when they saw what had taken place, returned home beating their breasts. [49] And all his acquaintances and the women who had followed him from Galilee stood at a distance watching these things.

[50] Now there was a man named Joseph, from the Jewish town of Arimathea. He was a member of the council, a good and righteous man, [51] who had not consented to their decision and action; and he was looking for the kingdom of God. [52] This man went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. [53] Then he took it down and wrapped it in a linen shroud and laid him in a tomb cut in stone, where no one had ever yet been laid. [54] It was the day of Preparation, and the Sabbath was beginning. [55] The women who had come with him from Galilee followed and saw the tomb and how his body was laid. [56] Then they returned and prepared spices and ointments.

On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment.

## Collect (adapted from _Concordia Psalter_ prayer for Ps 104 and LC III, 74)

Father in heaven, who provides for all Your creatures, supply us with all that we need for the support of this body and life, even as Your Son taught us to pray: “Give us this day our daily bread.” Supply us, we pray, with good government through which You preserve for us our daily bread and all the comforts of life.
Fill us with joyous confidence toward You, that worrying cares be banished from our hearts, and we may never doubt that You will so bless our labors as to provide us with food and clothing, and teach us to be therewith content;
through Jesus Christ Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. Amen.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 159 _Go to Dark Gethsemane
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 458 _Our Father, Thou in Heaven Above_ st 1‑5
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 149 _Come to Calvary's Holy Mountain

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, **“Our Father who art in heaven, … hallowed be Thy name. … Thy kingdom come. … Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven.”**
The Fourth Petition of the Lord's Prayer is **“Give us this day our daily bread.”**

> _What is meant by daily bread?_ Everything that belongs to the support and wants of the body, such as food, drink, clothing, shoes, house, home, field, cattle, money, goods, a pious spouse, pious children, pious servants, pious and faithful rulers, good government, good weather, peace, health, discipline, honor, good friends, faithful neighbors, and the like.<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

As creatures, we need daily bread to live, if even a crumb.
But if we are to have a loaf of bread on the table, we need flour and oil; if we are to have a loaf of bread on the table, we need an an oven to bake them in.
And if we do *not* bake our own bread, but buy it from the store, then we need *a lot* of things to go right.
We need the farmer; we need the flour mill; we need the bakery; we need all the people who grow, grind, and bake to be orderly and coordinated in such a way that the bread shows up on the store shelf *and we can afford to buy it*.
And we need work to earn money to buy the bread in the store.
If we do not work, we rely on someone to protect our savings so we can spend it when we need it.
Or if we have no savings and we do not work, we depend on someone else to work to earn the money to buy our daily bread.
And that's just bread!
There are so many things that we need from God to support this body and life.
That's what we pray for when we pray, **“Give us this day our daily bread.”**

But Satan's intent is to deprive us of our daily bread and then to tempt us as he tempted our Lord in the wilderness to turn stones into bread [(Lk 4:3)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%204%3A3/).
Satan's intent, for example, is to deprive us of our daily bread and then get us to steal for it.
Satan's intent is to deprive us of our daily bread and then to get us to listen to him in our need and so become his servants.
Protect us from this, heavenly Father!

However, Psalm 104 reveals that *God's* intent is to cause all things to happen to give us our daily bread:

> **You cause the grass to grow for the livestock and plants for man to cultivate,**  
> **that he may bring forth food from the earth and wine to gladden the heart of man,**  
> **oil to make his face shine**  
> **and bread to strengthen man's heart.**

God's good and gracious will is that we *have* our daily bread.
Did not our Lord even tell us,

> **“If God so clothes the grass of the field, … will he not much more clothe you, O you of little faith? Therefore do not be anxious, saying, ‘What shall we eat?’ or ‘What shall we drink?’ or ‘What shall we wear?’ For the Gentiles seek after all these things, and your heavenly Father knows that you need them all. But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you”**? [(Mt 6:30‑33 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Matthew%206%3A30-33/)

In other words, pray, **“Thy kingdom come,”** and expect to have your daily bread.
God's kingdom comes where God's Word is heard and believed.
Focus on trusting God's Word and expect to have your daily bread.

God would have given it all to us, as Adam and Eve ate without work in the Garden of Eden.
But since the fall, man has had to work by the sweat of his brow for daily bread.
In order to reduce the sweat of man's brow, God has blessed many lands with good government, including our own.
Have you ever tried to forage for food?
What if you depended on foraging for your daily bread?
Which would you rather do, forage for food or shop at Save‑A‑Lot?
Thank God we have good government that lets us have Save‑A‑Lot stores!
If you would rather shop at Save‑A‑Lot than forage for your daily bread, then thank God for good government.
St Paul teaches us to pray for good government in 1 Timothy, chapter 2:

> **“First of all, then, I urge that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgivings be made for all people, for kings and all who are in high positions, that we may lead a peaceful and quiet life, godly and dignified in every way.”** [(1Tm 2:1‑2 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/1%20Timothy%202%3A1-2/)

In summary, we are to pray and give thanks for food, clothing, shelter, and above all, our salvation in Christ. For if Satan would rob us of shelter, clothing, and food, we still have Jesus, the forgiveness our ous sins in His name, and an eternal home in heaven!

As a final note, you have the opportunity to pray for your daily bread before every meal.
I am sure that all of you pray before every meal!
*[Solicit]* What is the best known table prayer?

> Come, Lord Jesus, be our Guest,  
> And let Thy gifts to us be blest. Amen.

You may have learned this table prayer in the catechism:

> Lord God, Heavenly Father, bless us and these Thy gifts which we receive from Thy bountiful goodness, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

Please share your favorite prayers with me and I would like to make them into a congregational prayer booklet. If you are interested in learning another table prayer, here is one that is Dennis‑Montick‑approved:

> Lord God, Heavenly Father, who so graciously hast opened Thy hands to supply us with daily bread, in sincere appreciation we acknowledge Thy bountiful goodness and love in Christ Jesus, our Lord.

**“Give us this day our daily bread.”**
AMEN.

## Outline


## Notes

There is, indeed, the greatest need to pray for earthly authority and government. By them, most of all, God preserves for us our daily bread and all the comforts of this life.<sup>[<a name="id0003" href="#ftn.id0003">†</a>]</sup>


## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
Taken from the 1943 Concordia catechism

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0003" href="#id0003">†</a>]</sup>
LC III, 74
