<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Second Sunday after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Al Nemeth is reader.

## Announcements

* Practice Matins: review pp&nbsp;32 & 33
* Memorial Day weekend. Include honoring our fallen in the prayers. Eric Sistek posted: Don't say 'Happy Memorial Day'; it's a day to honor our fallen....

## Old Testament [1 Kings 8:22-24, 27-29, 41-43 ESV]

[22] Then Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all the assembly of Israel and spread out his hands toward heaven, [23] and said, “O Lord, God of Israel, there is no God like you, in heaven above or on earth beneath, keeping covenant and showing steadfast love to your servants who walk before you with all their heart; [24] you have kept with your servant David my father what you declared to him. You spoke with your mouth, and with your hand have fulfilled it this day.
[27] But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, heaven and the highest heaven cannot contain you; how much less this house that I have built! [28] Yet have regard to the prayer of your servant and to his plea, O Lord my God, listening to the cry and to the prayer that your servant prays before you this day, [29] that your eyes may be open night and day toward this house, the place of which you have said, ‘My name shall be there,’ that you may listen to the prayer that your servant offers toward this place.
[41] “Likewise, when a foreigner, who is not of your people Israel, comes from a far country for your name's sake [42] (for they shall hear of your great name and your mighty hand, and of your outstretched arm), when he comes and prays toward this house, [43] hear in heaven your dwelling place and do according to all for which the foreigner calls to you, in order that all the peoples of the earth may know your name and fear you, as do your people Israel, and that they may know that this house that I have built is called by your name.
	
## Epistle [Galatians 1:1-12 ESV; sermon text]

[1] Paul, an apostle—not from men nor through man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father, who raised him from the dead— [2] and all the brothers who are with me,
To the churches of Galatia:
[3] Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, [4] who gave himself for our sins to deliver us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father, [5] to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
[6] I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting him who called you in the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel— [7] not that there is another one, but there are some who trouble you and want to distort the gospel of Christ. [8] But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, let him be accursed. [9] As we have said before, so now I say again: If anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, let him be accursed.
[10] For am I now seeking the approval of man, or of God? Or am I trying to please man? If I were still trying to please man, I would not be a servant of Christ.
[11] For I would have you know, brothers, that the gospel that was preached by me is not man's gospel. [12] For I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it, but I received it through a revelation of Jesus Christ.

## Holy Gospel [Luke 7:1-10 ESV]

[1] After he had finished all his sayings in the hearing of the people, he entered Capernaum. [2] Now a centurion had a servant who was sick and at the point of death, who was highly valued by him. [3] When the centurion heard about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him to come and heal his servant. [4] And when they came to Jesus, they pleaded with him earnestly, saying, “He is worthy to have you do this for him, [5] for he loves our nation, and he is the one who built us our synagogue.” [6] And Jesus went with them. When he was not far from the house, the centurion sent friends, saying to him, “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy to have you come under my roof. [7] Therefore I did not presume to come to you. But say the word, and let my servant be healed. [8] For I too am a man set under authority, with soldiers under me: and I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” [9] When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turning to the crowd that followed him, said, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such faith.” [10] And when those who had been sent returned to the house, they found the servant well.

## Introit [Ps 86:1-4; antiphon: Ps. 86:11]

> Teach me your way, O LORD, that I may walk | in your truth;*  
> unite my heart to | fear your name. 
> Incline your ear, O LORD, and | answer me,*
> for I am poor and | needy.
> Preserve my life, for I am | godly;*
> save your servant, who trusts in you -- you | are my God.
> Be gracious to me, | O Lord,*
> for to you do I cry | all the day.
> Gladden the soul of your | servant,*
> for to you, O Lord, do I lift | up my soul.
> For great is your steadfast | love toward me;*
> you have delivered my soul from the depths | of Sheol.


## Collect

O God,
by Your almighty Word You set in order all things in heaven and on earth.
Put away from us all things hurtful,
and give us those things that are beneficial for us;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord,
who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit,
one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 243 _Oh, that I Had a Thousand Voices_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 411 _From Eternity, O God_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 334 _Let Me Be Thine Forever_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, you may know that there are some people who claim to have received a revelation directly from Jesus Christ, and they attract a following.
Joseph Smith claimed he received a revelation directly from Jesus Christ and from God the Father.
(Joseph Smith was the founder of the Mormon religion.)
He was fourteen years old and he was to be baptized,
and at that time where he lived in upstate New York,
so many Christian preachers had gone through the area teaching so many
different things that poor young Joseph Smith [did not know which Christian denomination to be baptized in&mdash;he did not know which Christian denomination to join](https://www.mormon.org/beliefs/joseph-smith).
And one day in the spring, young Joseph Smith went to a grove of trees to pray and there he claimed to see God the Father and God the Son.
They told him that none of the churches on the earth had the *fullness of truth*,
and that *he* was chosen to establish Christ's Church and to restore the priesthood.
That was the beginning of the Mormon religion&mdash;you know, those nice guys in shirts and ties who come knocking at your door.

In our Epistle reading today, St&nbsp;Paul also claims to have received a revelation directly from Jesus Christ:

> **&ldquo;I would have you know, brothers, that the gospel that was preached by me is not man's gospel. For I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it, but I received it through a revelation of Jesus Christ.&rdquo;**

And so, I just want to point out that St&nbsp;Paul and Joseph Smith both claim direct revelation from Jesus Christ.
Maybe we should listen to both of them.
&ldquo;Fine,&rdquo; you say, &ldquo;let them both say what they have to say;
let us not judge one against the other, for Jesus has appeared to both of them.&rdquo;
After all, neither you nor I saw Jesus speak to the apostle Paul or to Joseph Smith,
so who are we to judge?

Yet from this pulpit and at this altar, I will preach St&nbsp;Paul's view and exhort you to take to heart what he said:

> **&ldquo;But even if we[, the apostles,] or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we preached to you, _let him be accursed_. As we have said before, so now I say again: If anyone is preaching to you a gospel contrary to the one you received, _let him be accursed_.&rdquo;**

And with these undiplomatic words from St&nbsp;Paul we are left in that uncomfortable situation of rejecting, even condemning, a teaching if it does not conform with that of the apostles.
(This is the business of 2,000&nbsp;years of church history.)
After all, should we not respect the teachings of everyone who claims to have had
a revelation from Jesus Christ?
Well, I will use the Mormons as an example;
I could pick the Muslims or Jehovah's Witnesses just as well.
But the Mormon website [tells us](https://www.mormon.org/beliefs/plan-of-salvation)
that to make Christ's atonement fully effective in your life, you *need to*:

1. Exercise faith in Him.
1. Repent.
1. Be baptized.
1. Receive the Holy Ghost.
1. Choose to follow His teachings for the rest of your life.

Sounds fair.
This is the teaching of the followers of Joseph Smith; this is how Mormons believe they are saved:

* Exercise faith in Jesus.
* Repent.
* Be baptized.
* Receive the Holy Ghost.
* _Choose_ to follow His teachings for the rest of your life.

Sounds like if you lead an obedient life, you are going to heaven.

Now on Paul's side, we will carefully go into what his Gospel is and check if Paul's Gospel is in fact different from Joseph Smith's Gospel.
We will get started with it today and will continue for five weeks to come
while our Epistle readings in the lectionary are from the book of Galatians.

What is the Gospel that Paul preaches and defends with such strong words?
Well, remember where Paul came from:
Paul was once Saul the Pharisee.
Let us remember what our Lord Himself said to the Pharisees:

> **&ldquo;Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you shut the kingdom of heaven in people's faces. For you neither enter yourselves nor allow those who would enter to go in. Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel across sea and land to make a single proselyte, and when he becomes a proselyte, you make him twice as much a child of hell as yourselves.&rdquo;** [(Mt&nbsp;23:13&#x2011;15 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Matthew%2023%3A13-15/)

And with these undiplomatic words, Jesus calls the Pharisees hypocrites and charges them with making others to believe like they do and go to hell.
Could not Jesus have just respected the Pharisees or agreed to disagree?

But now let us turn our attention to the Holy Gospel.

> **After [Jesus] had finished all his sayings in the hearing of the people, he entered Capernaum. Now a centurion had a servant who was sick and at the point of death, who was highly valued by him. When the centurion heard about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him to come and heal his servant.** [(Lk&nbsp;7:1&#x2011;3)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%207%3A1-3/)

The centurion realizes

<center>I CANNOT DO IT MYSELF; JESUS MUST DO IT.</center>

> **And Jesus went with them. When he was not far from the house, the centurion sent friends, saying to him, “Lord, do not trouble yourself, for I am not worthy to have you come under my roof. &hellip; But _say the word_, and let my servant be healed. For I too am a man set under authority, with soldiers under me: and I say to one, ‘Go,’ and he goes; and to another, ‘Come,’ and he comes; and to my servant, ‘Do this,’ and he does it.” When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turning to the crowd that followed him, said, “I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such faith.” And when those who had been sent returned to the house, they found the servant well.** [(Lk&nbsp;7:6&#x2011;10 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%207%3A6-10/)

<center>I CANNOT DO IT MYSELF; ONLY JESUS HAS THE AUTHORITY TO DO IT.</center>

Here the fullness of truth is revealed: *I cannot do it myself; Jesus must do it. I cannot do it myself; only Jesus has the authority to do it.*
It begins with giving up on myself and turning it all over to Jesus.
You see, faith in Jesus is everything.
St&nbsp;Paul will have much to say about this in the weeks ahead. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Sermon hymn, st&nbsp;2: *For the flesh works ruination*.

This is the first of several Epistle readings from Galatians.
Our VBS theme this year is fruits of the Spirit listed in Galatians&nbsp;5:22&#x2011;23.

Preach the difference between Christian righteousness and all other kinds of righteousness.

* Christian righteousness is passive.
    * Other righteousness is active.
* Christian righteousness in hidden in a mystery, which the world cannot understand.
    * Active righteousness understands its own works.

As the earth itself does not produce rain and is unable to acquire it by its own strength, worship, and power but receives it only by a heavenly gift from above, so this heavenly righteousness is given to  us by God without our work or merit.<sup>[<a name="id0001" href="#ftn.id0001">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0001" href="#id0001">§</a>]</sup>
Martin Luther, *LW*, vol 26 (St Louis: Concordia, 1963) 6
