<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 5th Sunday of Easter

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Matt Liese is reader.
* After the service, Rich Thoma will announce Family Fun Night on 4/30.+

## Announcements

* Olivewood communion cups - wipe with tissue; keep


## First Reading [Ac 11:1-18 ESV]

[1] Now the apostles and the brothers who were throughout Judea heard that the Gentiles also had received the word of God. [2] So when Peter went up to Jerusalem, the circumcision party criticized him, saying, [3] “You went to uncircumcised men and ate with them.” [4] But Peter began and explained it to them in order: [5] “I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, something like a great sheet descending, being let down from heaven by its four corners, and it came down to me. [6] Looking at it closely, I observed animals and beasts of prey and reptiles and birds of the air. [7] And I heard a voice saying to me, ‘Rise, Peter; kill and eat.’ [8] But I said, ‘By no means, Lord; for nothing common or unclean has ever entered my mouth.’ [9] But the voice answered a second time from heaven, ‘What God has made clean, do not call common.’ [10] This happened three times, and all was drawn up again into heaven. [11] And behold, at that very moment three men arrived at the house in which we were, sent to me from Caesarea. [12] And the Spirit told me to go with them, making no distinction. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered the man's house. [13] And he told us how he had seen the angel stand in his house and say, ‘Send to Joppa and bring Simon who is called Peter; [14] he will declare to you a message by which you will be saved, you and all your household.’ [15] As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them just as on us at the beginning. [16] And I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, ‘John baptized with water, but you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.’ [17] If then God gave the same gift to them as he gave to us when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I could stand in God's way?” [18] When they heard these things they fell silent. And they glorified God, saying, “Then to the Gentiles also God has granted repentance that leads to life.”


## Epistle [Rv 21:1-7 ESV; sermon text]

[1] Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more. [2] And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. [3] And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, “Behold, the dwelling place of God is with man. He will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God. [4] He will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore, for the former things have passed away.”

[5] And he who was seated on the throne said, “Behold, I am making all things new.” Also he said, “Write this down, for these words are trustworthy and true.” [6] And he said to me, “It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To the thirsty I will give from the spring of the water of life without payment. [7] The one who conquers will have this heritage, and I will be his God and he will be my son.


## Holy Gospel [Jn 16:12-22 ESV]
[12] “I still have many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. [13] When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all the truth, for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. [14] He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you. [15] All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that he will take what is mine and declare it to you.
[16] “A little while, and you will see me no longer; and again a little while, and you will see me.” [17] So some of his disciples said to one another, “What is this that he says to us, ‘A little while, and you will not see me, and again a little while, and you will see me’; and, ‘because I am going to the Father’?” [18] So they were saying, “What does he mean by ‘a little while’? We do not know what he is talking about.” [19] Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him, so he said to them, “Is this what you are asking yourselves, what I meant by saying, ‘A little while and you will not see me, and again a little while and you will see me’? [20] Truly, truly, I say to you, you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will turn into joy. [21] When a woman is giving birth, she has sorrow because her hour has come, but when she has delivered the baby, she no longer remembers the anguish, for joy that a human being has been born into the world. [22] So also you have sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and no one will take your joy from you.


## Introit [Ps 98:2-6; antiphon: Ps 98:1]

> Oh sing to the LORD a new song, for he has done | marvelous things!*  
> His right hand and his holy arm have worked salva- | tion for him.  
> The LORD has made known his sal- | vation;*  
> he has revealed his righteousness in the sight of the | nations.  
> He has remembered his steadfast love and faithfulness to the house of | Israel.*  
> All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation | of our God.  
> Make a joyful noise to the LORD, | all the earth;*  
> break forth into joyous song and sing | praises!  
> Sing praises to the LORD | with the lyre,*  
> with the lyre and the sound of | melody!  
> With trumpets and the sound | of the horn*  
> make a joyful noise before the | King, the LORD!  

## Collect

O God,
You make the minds of Your faithful to be of one will.
Grant that we may love what You have commanded
and desire what You promise,
that among the many changes of this world
our hearts may be fixed where true joys are found;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord,
who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit,
one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 191 _Christ the Lord is Risen Today; Alleluia!_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 618 _Jerusalem, My Happy Home_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 315 _I Come, O Savior, to Thy Table_ st 6-10
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 201 _Jesus Lives! The Victory's Won_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, the book of Revelation is written ultimately to comfort Christ's Church and to reveal to you Jerusalem, your happy home, your heavenly home—a place so beautiful that it is well worth anything you may suffer here on earth.

*[Illustration]* The first Christian martyr, as you may recall, was Stephen.
He had preached a wonderful sermon, covering the breadth of the Bible to show that Jesus of Nazareth was the Righteous One announced by the prophets and killed by the very ones who had received God's law as delivered by angels and did not keep it [(Ac 7)](http://www.esvbible.org/Acts+7/).
His hearers were enraged, but as you may recall,
heaven opened and Stephen saw the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.
As Stephen was dying, he called out, **“Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” And falling to his knees, he cried out with a loud voice, “Lord, do not hold this sin against them.” And when he had said this, he fell asleep.**

Seeing heaven was Stephen's comfort when dying, and you can think of the book of Revelation in the same way,
for the book of Revelation tells us clearly that there will be much killing in the last days, and in particular the killing of Christians.

> **When [the Lamb] opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth living creature say, “Come!” And I looked, and behold, a pale horse! And its rider's name was Death, and Hades followed him. And they were given authority over a fourth of the earth, to kill with sword and with famine and with pestilence and by wild beasts of the earth.**

> **When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain for the word of God and for the witness they had borne. They cried out with a loud voice, “O Sovereign Lord, holy and true, how long before you will judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?” Then they were each given a white robe and told to rest a little longer, until the number of their fellow servants and their brothers should be complete, who were to be killed as they themselves had been.** [(Rv 6:7‑11 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation%206%3A7-11/)

There are reports even today that ISIS is targeting Christians and other religious minorities with rape, enslavement, and death.
President Obama has, in fact, declared this as [genocide of Christians](http://aclj.org/persecuted-church/aclj-launches-seven-point-plan-in-campaign-to-stop-isis-genocide-against-christians), but for some reason you hear little about it in the news and I am unaware of our government taking action to protect them.
Help them, Father, and protect them yourself with your right arm and your Spirit!
The white robes are being passed out right now and the martyrs are being told to rest **until the number of their fellow servants and their brothers should be complete, who were to be killed as they themselves had been**.
Beloved in the Lord, that could include us, says the book of Revelation,
and we should not doubt the Lord's protection and blessing even if we should be martyred.

> **Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more. And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, “Behold, the dwelling place of God is with man. He will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God. He will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore, for the former things have passed away.”**

Beloved in the Lord, through the forgiveness of sins in the name of Jesus, this is all yours!
May this be your dying vision whether your are martyred or die peacefully in hospice.

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Ac 10:46‑48. Cornelius's household received the Holy Spirit, and then were baptized right away.

Ac 11:9. What God has made clean, do not call common.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
