<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 5th after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Trina will read

## Announcements

* Happy Fathers' Day!
* Matins practice: _Te Deum_: p 35 (review) and p 36 (new).
There is a key change to minor key¿ on pg 36; it changes back to
major key on p 37.
    * The _Te Deum_ was written around 500 AD in Latin, possibly by monks.
    * Martin Luther loved the _Te Deum_ third behind the Apostles' Creed and the Athanasian Creed. Legend has it that this was sung at the Baptism of St Augustine. Luther loved it _for the purpose of confessing the true faith, and for praising and thanking God_.<sup>[<a name="id0001" href="#ftn.id0001">§</a>]</sup>
    * Luther paraphrased the Latin _Te Deum_ into a rhymed chant for common German people.
    * In Lutheran churches, the _Te Deum_ has been sung not only at Matins, but also on festival days, like St Michael's, All Saints', Thanksgiving, confirmation, and marriage.	

## Old Testament [Is 65:1-9 ESV]


> [1] I was ready to be sought by those who did not ask for me;  
> I was ready to be found by those who did not seek me.  
> I said, “Here I am, here I am,”  
> to a nation that was not called by my name.  
> [2] I spread out my hands all the day  
> to a rebellious people,  
> who walk in a way that is not good,  
> following their own devices;  
> [3] a people who provoke me  
> to my face continually,  
> sacrificing in gardens  
> and making offerings on bricks;  
> [4] who sit in tombs,  
> and spend the night in secret places;  
> who eat pig's flesh,  
> and broth of tainted meat is in their vessels;  
> [5] who say, “Keep to yourself,  
> do not come near me, for I am too holy for you.”  
> These are a smoke in my nostrils,  
> a fire that burns all the day.  
> [6] Behold, it is written before me:  
> “I will not keep silent, but I will repay;  
> I will indeed repay into their lap  
> [7] 	both your iniquities and your fathers' iniquities together,  
> says the LORD;  
> because they made offerings on the mountains  
> and insulted me on the hills,  
> I will measure into their lap  
> payment for their former deeds.”  

> [8] Thus says the LORD:  
> “As the new wine is found in the cluster,  
> and they say, ‘Do not destroy it,  
> for there is a blessing in it,’  
> so I will do for my servants' sake,  
> and not destroy them all.  
> [9] I will bring forth offspring from Jacob,  
> and from Judah possessors of my mountains;  
> my chosen shall possess it,  
> and my servants shall dwell there.  

## Epistle [Gal 3:23-4:7 ESV; sermon text]

[23] Now before faith came, we were held captive under the law, imprisoned until the coming faith would be revealed. [24] So then, the law was our guardian until Christ came, in order that we might be justified by faith. [25] But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a guardian, [26] for in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God, through faith. [27] For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ. [28] There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is no male and female, for you are all one in Christ Jesus. [29] And if you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's offspring, heirs according to promise.

[1] I mean that the heir, as long as he is a child, is no different from a slave, though he is the owner of everything, [2] but he is under guardians and managers until the date set by his father. [3] In the same way we also, when we were children, were enslaved to the elementary principles of the world. [4] But when the fullness of time had come, God sent forth his Son, born of woman, born under the law, [5] to redeem those who were under the law, so that we might receive adoption as sons. [6] And because you are sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, “Abba! Father!” [7] So you are no longer a slave, but a son, and if a son, then an heir through God.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 8:26-39 ESV]

[26] Then they sailed to the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee. [27] When Jesus had stepped out on land, there met him a man from the city who had demons. For a long time he had worn no clothes, and he had not lived in a house but among the tombs. [28] When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him and said with a loud voice, “What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me.” [29] For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. (For many a time it had seized him. He was kept under guard and bound with chains and shackles, but he would break the bonds and be driven by the demon into the desert.) [30] Jesus then asked him, “What is your name?” And he said, “Legion,” for many demons had entered him. [31] And they begged him not to command them to depart into the abyss. [32] Now a large herd of pigs was feeding there on the hillside, and they begged him to let them enter these. So he gave them permission. [33] Then the demons came out of the man and entered the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake and drowned.

[34] When the herdsmen saw what had happened, they fled and told it in the city and in the country. [35] Then people went out to see what had happened, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind, and they were afraid. [36] And those who had seen it told them how the demon-possessed man had been healed. [37] Then all the people of the surrounding country of the Gerasenes asked him to depart from them, for they were seized with great fear. So he got into the boat and returned. [38] The man from whom the demons had gone begged that he might be with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying, [39] “Return to your home, and declare how much God has done for you.” And he went away, proclaiming throughout the whole city how much Jesus had done for him.

## Introit [Ps 71:20-24; antiphon: Ps 71:3]

> Be to me a rock of refuge, to which I may contin- | ually come;*  
> you have given the command to save me, for you are my rock and my | fortress.  
> You who have made me see many troubles and calamities will revive | me again;*  
> from the depths of the earth you will bring me | up again.  
> You will increase my | greatness*  
> and comfort | me again.  
> I will also praise you with the harp for your faithfulness, | O my God;*  
> I will sing praises to you with the lyre, O Holy One of | Israel.  
> My lips will shout for joy, when I sing prais- | es to you;*  
> my soul also, which you | have redeemed.  
> And my tongue will talk of your righteous help all | the day long,*  
> for they have been put to shame and disappointed who sought to | do me hurt.


## Collect

O God, You have prepared for those who love You such good things as surpass our understanding. Cast out all sins and evil desires from us, and pour into our hearts Your Holy Sirit to guide us into all blessedness; 
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 247 _God the Father, Be Our Stay_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 99 _Now Are the Days Fulfilled_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 297 _The Gospel Shows the Father's Grace_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, we left off last week about the work of the Holy Spirit.
Do you live a Spirit-filled life by believing Christ's forgiveness of your sins or by trying to keep the Ten Commandments?
I mean, “Here are God's rules: live by them and you will receive the Holy Spirit.”
_No you won't._
Though it makes you think&mdash;though it may seem plausible&mdash;it is utterly false that you receive the Holy Spirit by being a lawkeeper;
it is utterly false that you receive the forgiveness of sins by being a lawkeeper.
That is where we left off last week.

But if you would rather pursue salvation by being a lawkeeper, you may want to be a Mormon.
Returning to the Mormons as an example, the entire Mormon religion [is built on the doctrine of _eternal progression_](http://www.truthiseternal.com/eprog.html).
Here is what the website [mormonwiki.com](http://www.mormonwiki.com/Main_Page) says about eternal progression:

> Eternal progression is a common phrase among Latter-day Saints referring to the idea that there is no limit to our potential. In other words, _if we obey God_ and receive every blessing He has in store for us, we will increase in happiness and glory forever, just as He does. Mormons call this state of happiness _exaltation_.

> [Eternal life is given to those who qualify by entering into sacred covenants and ordinances and remaining true and faithful to them. We then can enjoy the blessings of exaltation.](http://www.mormonwiki.com/Eternal_Progression)

* “_If_ we obey God.”
* “Qualify by entering into sacred covenants and ordinances”&mdash;presumably at a Mormon temple&mdash;“and remaining true and faithful to them. We _then_ can enjoy the blessings of exaltation.”

The Mormons have a new list of rules to keep, and _then_ you can enjoy heaven.

But, from our Epistle reading,

> **Before faith came, we were held captive under the law, imprisoned until the coming faith would be revealed. So then, the law was our guardian until Christ came, in order that we might be justified by faith.**

Here, God says that **we were held captive under God's Law, imprisoned until the coming faith would be revealed**.
We were held captive under God's Law, not man-made Mormon law&mdash;_God's_ Law, the Ten Commandments.
But the Ten Commandments were **our guardian _until Christ came_**.
When Christ came, as we heard last week,

> **Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us&mdash;for it is written, “Cursed is everyone who is hanged on a tree.”** [(Gal&nbsp;3:13)](http://www.esvbible.org/Galatians%203%3A13/)

_[Point to Crucifixion window.]_
And there is Christ, crucified on the tree, cursed by the Law.
Believe that He is there in your place and&mdash;Alleulia!&mdash;you are justified by faith.

Now what does it mean to be justified?
It means that you are forgiven of all charges that God has against you.
You committed your sins; you have confessed your sins; you are condemned by your sins.
Now see the one who was condemned in your place.
Do you believe He did it for you?
Then you are forgiven&mdash;God has dropped your charges for the sake of His Son who was punished on the Cross in your place.

At this point, your flesh says, “What can I do to make it all good?
Can I build an orphanage? Can I be good? Can I pray seven times a day?
Can I give my money to the poor?”
That is an insult to Christ!
What is there left to do for your forgiveness that He did not do on the Cross?
Nothing!
You are justified by faith in the Cross.

Eternal progression may be the cornerstone of Mormon teaching, but these false teachers must have skipped Jesus.
Even if their man-made law were God's Law, it would save no one and curse everyone.
Eternal progression, contrary to Mormon teaching, saves _no one_.

Lest you think that you are justified before God by keeping the Law better than someone else, remember Jesus' Parable of Pharisee and the Tax Collector.

> **The Pharisee, standing by himself, prayed thus: &ldquo;God, I thank you that I am not like other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.&rdquo;** (Lk&nbsp;18:11 ESV)

> **&ldquo;But the tax collector, standing far off, would not even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, &ldquo;God, be merciful to me, a sinner!&rdquo;** (Lk&nbsp;18:13 ESV)

> **I tell you, this man went down to his house justified, rather than the other. For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but the one who humbles himself will be exalted.** (Lk&nbsp;18:14 ESV)

Do not let yourself wind up a Pharisee praying, “I'm glad I'm better than these.”
Then you will be what Paul once was.
You can see why Paul gets excited:
he does not want you to turn into what he once was. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Gal 2:5. Luther: “The truth of the Gospel is this, that our righteousness comes by faith alone, without the works of the Law.
The falsification or corruption of the Gospel is this, that we are justified by faith but not without the works of the Law.”<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">†</a>]</sup>

Is 65:8. The servant is Israel.

This may put the congregation a little off-balance: the sermon hymn is a Christmas hymn, but it is taken from Gal 4:4:

> _Now are the days fulfilled,_  
> _The child of God rejoices;_  
> _No bondage of the Law,_  
> _No curses that it voices,_  
> _Can fill our hearts with fear;_  
> _On Christ our hope we build._  
> _Behold the Prince of Peace&mdash;_  
> _Now are the days fulfilled._

You start as intelligent matter, and if you keep the rules, you attain godhood;
that is eternal progression.
Godhood means you are God, just as God the Father was once a man on another planet who kept the same laws to become the one we worship as God the Father.
_You have got to be kidding!_
Welcome to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter‑Day Saints.
The current Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of the Mormon church begins an official letter with these words:
[“In God's plan for the happiness and eternal progression of His children …”](https://www.lds.org/prophets-and-apostles/june-first-presidency-statement?lang=eng).
Eternal progression is what every Mormon is after.

> [[Former Mormon President Brigham Young] encouraged the Saints to be engaged in worthwhile activities, to broaden and deepen their understanding, and to treasure up truth as they reached toward perfection. By so doing, they would eventually go forward to enter the spirit world and continue on the glorious path of eternal progression.](https://www.lds.org/manual/teachings-brigham-young/chapter-13?lang=eng)

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0001" href="#id0001">§</a>]</sup>
Martin Luther, _Luther's Works_, vol. 53 (St. Louis: Concordia, 1965) 171.

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">†</a>]</sup>
Martin Luther, _Luther's Works_, vol. 26 (St. Louis: Concordia, 1965) 88.
