<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Third Sunday after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Practice Matins: No review; start with "But Thou, O Lord..." and response....then through stanza 7 of Te Deum
* Ask Marina to lead in singing Te Deum loudly from organ balcony? (I am checking with Marc re his opinion on this too)
* Hymn Sing
* Desiree is reader

## Announcements

* Ruth Sommerfeld is hospitalized in Parma Hospital with pneumonia.
* Rich Thoma will speak briefly after closing hymn re LCMS National Offering Sunday June 12.
* Saw Joe Russo on Friday.

## Old Testament [1Ki 17:17-24 ESV]
	
[17] After this the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, became ill. And his illness was so severe that there was no breath left in him. [18] And she said to Elijah, “What have you against me, O man of God? You have come to me to bring my sin to remembrance and to cause the death of my son!” [19] And he said to her, “Give me your son.” And he took him from her arms and carried him up into the upper chamber where he lodged, and laid him on his own bed. [20] And he cried to the Lord, “O Lord my God, have you brought calamity even upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by killing her son?” [21] Then he stretched himself upon the child three times and cried to the Lord, “O Lord my God, let this child's life come into him again.” [22] And the Lord listened to the voice of Elijah. And the life of the child came into him again, and he revived. [23] And Elijah took the child and brought him down from the upper chamber into the house and delivered him to his mother. And Elijah said, “See, your son lives.” [24] And the woman said to Elijah, “Now I know that you are a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in your mouth is truth.”
	
## Epistle [Gal 1:11-24 ESV; sermon text]

[11] For I would have you know, brothers, that the gospel that was preached by me is not man's gospel. [12] For I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it, but I received it through a revelation of Jesus Christ. [13] For you have heard of my former life in Judaism, how I persecuted the church of God violently and tried to destroy it. [14] And I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people, so extremely zealous was I for the traditions of my fathers. [15] But when he who had set me apart before I was born, and who called me by his grace, [16] was pleased to reveal his Son to me, in order that I might preach him among the Gentiles, I did not immediately consult with anyone; [17] nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia, and returned again to Damascus.
[18] Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Cephas and remained with him fifteen days. [19] But I saw none of the other apostles except James the Lord's brother. [20] (In what I am writing to you, before God, I do not lie!) [21] Then I went into the regions of Syria and Cilicia. [22] And I was still unknown in person to the churches of Judea that are in Christ. [23] They only were hearing it said, “He who used to persecute us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy.” [24] And they glorified God because of me.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 7:11-17 ESV]

[11] Soon afterward he went to a town called Nain, and his disciples and a great crowd went with him. [12] As he drew near to the gate of the town, behold, a man who had died was being carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow, and a considerable crowd from the town was with her. [13] And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her and said to her, “Do not weep.” [14] Then he came up and touched the bier, and the bearers stood still. And he said, “Young man, I say to you, arise.” [15] And the dead man sat up and began to speak, and Jesus gave him to his mother. [16] Fear seized them all, and they glorified God, saying, “A great prophet has arisen among us!” and “God has visited his people!” [17] And this report about him spread through the whole of Judea and all the surrounding country.


## Introit [Ps 138:3, 7-8; antiphon: Ps. 86:16]

> Turn to me and be gra- | cious to me;*  
> give your strength to your servant, and save the son of your maid- | servant.  
> On the day I called, you | answered me;*  
> my strength of soul | you increased.  
> Though I walk in the midst of trouble, you pre- | serve my life;*  
> you stretch out your hand against the wrath of my enemies, and your right hand de- | livers me.  
> The LORD will fulfill his pur- | pose for me;*  
> your steadfast love, O LORD, endures forever. Do not forsake the work | of your hands.


## Collect

O Lord, Father of all mercy and God of all comfort, You always go before and follow after us. Grant that we may rejoice in Your gracious presence and continually be given to all good works; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 370 _My Hope is Built on Nothing Less_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 376 _Rock of Ages, Cleft for Me_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 657 _Beautiful Savior_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, if an ISIS fighter were to preach the Gospel in the streets of Syria&mdash;and, Lord, please bring it to pass&mdash;what would the Christians say 	who once lived in fear of him?
**&ldquo;He who used to persecute us is now preaching the faith he once tried to destroy.&rdquo;**
Imagine a man, who had abused and killed Christians, is now preaching that **&ldquo;there is salvation in no one else [than Jesus], for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved&rdquo;** [(Ac&nbsp;4:12)](http://www.esvbible.org/Acts+4:12/).
If this were to happen, it would not be the first time.
For it happened with Saul the Pharisee,
who persecuted Christians in Jerusalem and was on his way to Damascus, Syria to arrest some more and bring them in chains back to Jerusalem when he met Jesus on the road to Damascus.

> **&ldquo;Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?&rdquo; And [Saul] said, &ldquo;Who are you, Lord?&rdquo; And he said, &ldquo;I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. But rise and enter the city, and you will be told what you are to do.&rdquo;** [(Ac&nbsp;9:4-6 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Acts%209%3A4-6/)

And we know what happened after Saul entered Damascus.
He had been struck blind when he met Jesus on the road to Damascus,
but he was directed to the home of Ananias in Damascus;
Ananias laid his hands on Saul; Saul got his sight back, he was baptized, and he was filled with the Holy Spirit.
Never again to be the Pharisee Saul, *St&nbsp;Paul* was ready to go.

We hear from our Epistle reading what St&nbsp;Paul did after he was baptized in Damascus:

> **I did not immediately consult with anyone; nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia, and returned again to Damascus.**

Paul was now a called instrument of the Gospel, but he did not go straight to Jerusalem to check in with the apostles.
The point is that he did not need to.

You heard it from Paul himself that in Pharisaism&mdash;who he used to be&mdash;*the traditions of the fathers* held the day:

> **For you have heard of my former life in Judaism, how I persecuted the church of God violently and tried to destroy it. And I was advancing in Judaism beyond many of my own age among my people, so extremely zealous was I for the _traditions of my fathers_.**

And there is the core of Pharasaism: the traditions of the fathers&mdash;rules or traditions introduced by elders of previous generations.

Do you remember what Jesus had to say about the traditions of the elders?

> **And [Jesus] said to [the Pharisees], &ldquo;You have a fine way of rejecting the commandment of God in order to establish your tradition! For Moses said, &lsquo;Honor your father and your mother&rsquo;; and, &lsquo;Whoever reviles father or mother must surely die.&rsquo; But you say, &lsquo;If a man tells his father or his mother, &ldquo;Whatever you would have gained from me is Corban&rdquo;&rsquo; (that is, given to God)&mdash;then you no longer permit him to do anything for his father or mother, thus _making void the word of God by your tradition_ that you have handed down. _And many such things you do._&rdquo;** [(Mk&nbsp;7:9&#x2011;13 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Mark%207%3A9-13/)

The Mormons have a scripture that is called *The Doctrine and Covenants*, which is basically the traditions laid down by the Mormon fathers.

> **And after that, those who have thus been tithed shall pay one-tenth of all their interest annually; and this shall be a standing law unto them forever, for my holy priesthood, saith the Lord.**

> **Verily I say unto you, it shall come to pass that all those who gather unto the land of Zion shall be tithed of their surplus properties, and shall observe this law, or they shall not be found worthy to abide among you.**

> **And I say unto you, if my people observe not this law, to keep it holy, and by this law sanctify the land of Zion unto me, that my statutes and my judgments may be kept thereon, that it may be most holy, behold, verily I say unto you, it shall not be a land of Zion unto you.**

The land of Zion is Independence, Missouri, not heaven.
Joseph Smith had declared that [the righteous would gather in the land of Zion to await the second coming of Christ](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/09/22/for-mormons-missouri-rema_n_1905057.html).
The point is that, according to the traditions of the Mormons, you cannot be righteous without tithing 10%.

Do you see the difference?
Are you alarmed by this teaching?

> **Yet we know that a person is not justified by works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, so we also have believed in Christ Jesus, in order to be justified by faith in Christ and not by works of the law, _because by works of the law no one will be justified_.** [(Gal&nbsp;2:16 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Galatians%202%3A16/)

Paul is not being disrespectful to the traditions of the elders.
Paul is not being disrespectful to the apostles.
Paul is defending the truth of the Gospel.
AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Introit. My own strength will always fail.

1Ki 17. This is the widow at Zarephath, where **“The jar of flour shall not be spent, and the jug of oil shall not be empty.”**

1Ki 17:17‑18. The widow confesses her sin, but Elijah makes no mention of it.

1Ki 17:24. Now the widow is finally convinced of the truth.

Preach the difference between Christian righteousness and all other kinds of righteousness.

[Joseph Smith was given an extraordinary calling, and because he kept himself worthy of the blessings of heaven, he was able to bring the Book of Mormon to the world.](https://www.mormon.org/beliefs/book-of-mormon)

[ISIS has often targeted Christians in its attacks, and has told them to convert to Islam, pay a tax, or be killed for their faith in the cities it has captured.](http://www.christianpost.com/news/isis-beheads-21-coptic-christians-in-message-to-nation-of-the-cross-egypt-bombs-terror-group-in-response-134142/)

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
