<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 11th after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Matins practice: just the Te Deum
* Trina is reader.

## Announcements

* Thank you to everyone who helped with Family Fun Night. It was big! Please pray for the follow-up, that we would see the families in church.
* Baptism next week followed by a party to celebrate the Baptism. Adult Bible study will be canceled.

## Old Testament [Ec 1:2, 12‑14; 2:18‑26 ESV]

[1:2] Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher,
vanity of vanities! All is vanity. 

[12] I the Preacher have been king over Israel in Jerusalem. [13] And I applied my heart to seek and to search out by wisdom all that is done under heaven. It is an unhappy business that God has given to the children of man to be busy with. [14] I have seen everything that is done under the sun, and behold, all is vanity and a striving after wind.

[2:18] I hated all my toil in which I toil under the sun, seeing that I must leave it to the man who will come after me, [19] and who knows whether he will be wise or a fool? Yet he will be master of all for which I toiled and used my wisdom under the sun. This also is vanity. [20] So I turned about and gave my heart up to despair over all the toil of my labors under the sun, [21] because sometimes a person who has toiled with wisdom and knowledge and skill must leave everything to be enjoyed by someone who did not toil for it. This also is vanity and a great evil. [22] What has a man from all the toil and striving of heart with which he toils beneath the sun? [23] For all his days are full of sorrow, and his work is a vexation. Even in the night his heart does not rest. This also is vanity.

[24] There is nothing better for a person than that he should eat and drink and find enjoyment in his toil. This also, I saw, is from the hand of God, [25] for apart from him who can eat or who can have enjoyment? [26] For to the one who pleases him God has given wisdom and knowledge and joy, but to the sinner he has given the business of gathering and collecting, only to give to one who pleases God. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.

## Epistle [Col 3:1-11 ESV; sermon text]

[1] If then you have been raised with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. [2] Set your minds on things that are above, not on things that are on earth. [3] For you have died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God. [4] When Christ who is your life appears, then you also will appear with him in glory.

[5] Put to death therefore what is earthly in you: sexual immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry. [6] On account of these the wrath of God is coming. [7] In these you too once walked, when you were living in them. [8] But now you must put them all away: anger, wrath, malice, slander, and obscene talk from your mouth. [9] Do not lie to one another, seeing that you have put off the old self with its practices [10] and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge after the image of its creator. [11] Here there is not Greek and Jew, circumcised and uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, free; but Christ is all, and in all.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 12:13-21 ESV]

[13] Someone in the crowd said to him, “Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me.” [14] But he said to him, “Man, who made me a judge or arbitrator over you?” [15] And he said to them, “Take care, and be on your guard against all covetousness, for one's life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions.” [16] And he told them a parable, saying, “The land of a rich man produced plentifully, [17] and he thought to himself, ‘What shall I do, for I have nowhere to store my crops?’ [18] And he said, ‘I will do this: I will tear down my barns and build larger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods. [19] And I will say to my soul, “Soul, you have ample goods laid up for many years; relax, eat, drink, be merry.”’ [20] But God said to him, ‘Fool! This night your soul is required of you, and the things you have prepared, whose will they be?’ [21] So is the one who lays up treasure for himself and is not rich toward God.”


## Introit [Ps 49:7-8, 13-14a, 15; antiphon: Ps 49:1-2]

> Hear this, all | peoples!*  
> Give ear, all inhabitants | of the world,  
> both | low and high,*  
> rich and poor to- | gether!  
> Truly no man can ransom an- | other,*  
> or give to God the price | of his life,  
> for the ransom of their life is | costly*  
> and can nev- | er suffice.  
> This is the path of those who have foolish | confidence;*  
> yet after them people approve | of their boasts.  
> Like sheep they are appointed | for Sheol;*  
> Death shall be their | shepherd.  
> But God will ransom my soul from the power | of Sheol,*  
> for he will re- | ceive me.

## Collect

O Lord, grant us wisdom to recognize the treasures You have stored up for us in heaven, that we may never despair but always rejoice and be thankful for the riches of Your grace;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 1 _Open Now Thy Gates of Beauty_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 225 _Come, Holy Spirit, Come_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 463 _For All the Saints Who from Their Labors Rest_ st 1-5, 8, 6, 7

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, I have heard more than one person say, &ldquo;If I win the lottery &hellip;&rdquo;
A lot of people are in financial trouble&mdash;too many expenses and not enough income&mdash;so they spend some of that money that they do not have enough of gambling on a big payday: &ldquo;I won the lottery!&rdquo;

Imagine for a moment winning the lottery&mdash;&ldquo;My financial burdens have been lifted and&rdquo;&mdash;some have told me&mdash;&ldquo;I would help the church.&rdquo;
It tricks you into thinking, &ldquo;Hey, why wouldn't God _want_ me to win the lottery?&rdquo;
Beloved in the Lord, have you ever thought of _working_?
Take note that nowhere does the Bible bless gambling.
What what the Bible does talk about is working&mdash;labor under the sun; it happens to be our Old Testament reading today:

> **I hated all my toil in which I toil under the sun,**&mdash;Oops! Did I really mean to say that?&mdash;**seeing that I must leave it to the man who will come after me, and who knows whether he will be wise or a fool?** [(Ec&nbsp;2:18&#x2011;19b)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ecclesiastes%202%3A18-19/)

Okay, even working is not that great, but the main point is this:

> **There is nothing better for a person than that he should eat and drink and find enjoyment in his toil. This also, I saw, is from the hand of God.** [(Ec&nbsp;2:24)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ecclesiastes%202%3A24/)

So, beloved in the Lord, Solomon, in all his inspired wisdom, says that there is _nothing better_ than finding enjoyment in your work; to find enjoyment in your work is a gift from the hand of God, and may we all have this gift and give up on the lottery.

But what if you did not?
What if you kept playing the lottery in hope of a financial windfall so all your problems would go away?
Now here comes your _benefactor_&mdash;someone _gives you_ the money you need to get out of the hole.
He writes a check and _poof!_&mdash;your financial problems are gone.
_Would you still play the lottery?_

How did you get into the financial mess you got into in the first place?
Did you have trouble holding a job?
Did you pay $80 a month for smoking?
$50 a month for cable TV?
$50 a month for your smartphone?
$200 a month on eating out when you could have cooked at home?
$20 a month for lottery tickets?
Now that your benefactor has bailed you out, will you change _any_ of the financial habits that got you into trouble in the first place, and most importantly, _would you still play the lottery_?
Your benefactor, by the way, worked hard for his money and did not throw it away on the lottery.
He never ate out, and if he got fancy, he maybe added a little meat to his rice and beans.
He worked hard and he saved _his money_ and gave it to _you_ out of mercy.
_Would you still play the lottery?_

If you received your gift in appreciation and confessed your own faults that caused your debt, you would of course _not_ play the lottery anymore.
If you did, you should be ashamed of yourself.
Hear from our Introit today what a debt each of us has got:

> **Truly no man can ransom another,**  
> **or give to God the price of his life,**  
> **for the ransom of their life is costly**  
> **and can never suffice.**

This is not about money, this is about _life_.
**_No man_**&mdash;and this means all of us&mdash;**can ransom another, or give to God the price of his life.**
We have thrown our life away by sinning and there is no man who can buy it back for us.
You certainly cannot, and no one else can either.

> **&ldquo;What is impossible with man is possible with God.&rdquo;** [(Lk&nbsp;18:27 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke+18:27/)

God _can_ pay the debt for your life and He has: _[Point to Crucifixion window]_ He died on the Cross to pay for your sins.

Beloved in the Lord, do not return to playing the lottery:

> **Put to death therefore what is earthly in you: sexual immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry. On account of these the wrath of God is coming. _In these you too once walked_, when you were living in them.** _But not anymore!_ **But now you must put them all away: anger, wrath, malice, slander, and obscene talk from your mouth. Do not lie to one another, seeing that _you have put off the old self with its practices_** (give up the gambling; give up the old habits _because you are not the same person now that your are forgiven_) **and have put on the _new self_, which is being renewed in knowledge after the image of its creator.**

The benefit of believing that your are forgiven by Jesus, the benefit of believing your Baptism is that you have been _born from above_, born again as a new person.
That is the work of the Holy Spirit in your life: that you would not even think of buying lottery tickets again when God has so graciously paid your debt.

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Ec 2:24. This is the best thing out there.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
