<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 19th after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* ZZZ

## Announcements

* Thank you everyone who helped with the church picnic and everyone who came.

## Old Testament [Am 6:1-7 ESV]

> [1] “Woe to those who are at ease in Zion,  
> and to those who feel secure on the mountain of Samaria,  
> the notable men of the first of the nations,  
> to whom the house of Israel comes!  
> [2] Pass over to Calneh, and see,  
> and from there go to Hamath the great;  
> then go down to Gath of the Philistines.  
> Are you better than these kingdoms?  
> Or is their territory greater than your territory,  
> [3] O you who put far away the day of disaster  
> and bring near the seat of violence?

> [4] “Woe to those who lie on beds of ivory  
> and stretch themselves out on their couches,  
> and eat lambs from the flock  
> and calves from the midst of the stall,  
> [5] who sing idle songs to the sound of the harp  
> and like David invent for themselves instruments of music,  
> [6] who drink wine in bowls  
> and anoint themselves with the finest oils,  
> but are not grieved over the ruin of Joseph!  
> [7] Therefore they shall now be the first of those who go into exile,  
> and the revelry of those who stretch themselves out shall pass away.”

## Epistle [1Tm 3:1-13 ESV; sermon text]

[1] The saying is trustworthy: If anyone aspires to the office of overseer, he desires a noble task. [2] Therefore an overseer must be above reproach, the husband of one wife, sober-minded, self-controlled, respectable, hospitable, able to teach, [3] not a drunkard, not violent but gentle, not quarrelsome, not a lover of money. [4] He must manage his own household well, with all dignity keeping his children submissive, [5] for if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how will he care for God's church? [6] He must not be a recent convert, or he may become puffed up with conceit and fall into the condemnation of the devil. [7] Moreover, he must be well thought of by outsiders, so that he may not fall into disgrace, into a snare of the devil.

[8] Deacons likewise must be dignified, not double-tongued, not addicted to much wine, not greedy for dishonest gain. [9] They must hold the mystery of the faith with a clear conscience. [10] And let them also be tested first; then let them serve as deacons if they prove themselves blameless. [11] Their wives likewise must be dignified, not slanderers, but sober-minded, faithful in all things. [12] Let deacons each be the husband of one wife, managing their children and their own households well. [13] For those who serve well as deacons gain a good standing for themselves and also great confidence in the faith that is in Christ Jesus.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 16:19-31 ESV]

[19] “There was a rich man who was clothed in purple and fine linen and who feasted sumptuously every day. [20] And at his gate was laid a poor man named Lazarus, covered with sores, [21] who desired to be fed with what fell from the rich man's table. Moreover, even the dogs came and licked his sores. [22] The poor man died and was carried by the angels to Abraham's side. The rich man also died and was buried, [23] and in Hades, being in torment, he lifted up his eyes and saw Abraham far off and Lazarus at his side. [24] And he called out, ‘Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus to dip the end of his finger in water and cool my tongue, for I am in anguish in this flame.’ [25] But Abraham said, ‘Child, remember that you in your lifetime received your good things, and Lazarus in like manner bad things; but now he is comforted here, and you are in anguish. [26] And besides all this, between us and you a great chasm has been fixed, in order that those who would pass from here to you may not be able, and none may cross from there to us.’ [27] And he said, ‘Then I beg you, father, to send him to my father's house—[28] for I have five brothers—so that he may warn them, lest they also come into this place of torment.’ [29] But Abraham said, ‘They have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear them.’ [30] And he said, ‘No, father Abraham, but if someone goes to them from the dead, they will repent.’ [31] He said to him, ‘If they do not hear Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be convinced if someone should rise from the dead.’”

## Introit [Ps 119:73-75,77; antiphon: Ps 119:76]

> Let your steadfast love | comfort me*  
> according to your promise to your | servant. 
> Your hands have made and | fashioned me;*
> give me understanding that I may learn your com- | mandments.
> Those who fear you shall see me | and rejoice,*
> because I have hoped | in your word.
> I know, O LORD, that your just decrees are | righteous,*
> and that in faithfulness you have af- | flicted me.
> Let your mercy come to me, that | I may live;*
for your law is | my delight.


## Collect

O God, You are the strength of all who trust in You, and without Your aid we can do no good thing. Grant us the help of Your grace that we may please You in both will and deed; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 248 _Father of Glory, to Thy Name_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 491 _Send, O Lord, Thy Holy Spirit_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 315 _I Come, O Savior, to Thy Table_ st 6-10
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 54 _Guide Me, O Thou Great Jehovah_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes


ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
