<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Transfiguration

## Announcements

* Lent is around the corner! Ash Wednesday is this Wednesday already! Bible study on “The Ten Commandments” movie at 4:30 (meet in the first-floor classroom); soup supper at 6 (tell Trina if you are coming); service at 7.
* Counting ahead the 40 days of Lent, which don't include Sundays, that means
    * Maundy Thurday is Mar 24.
    * Good Friday is Mar 25.
    * Holy Saturday is Mar 26.
    * Easter Sunday is Mar 27.

## Old Testament [Dt 34:1‑12 ESV]

[1] Then Moses went up from the plains of Moab to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, which is opposite Jericho. And the LORD showed him all the land, Gilead as far as Dan, [2] all Naphtali, the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, all the land of Judah as far as the western sea, [3] the Negeb, and the Plain, that is, the Valley of Jericho the city of palm trees, as far as Zoar. [4] And the LORD said to him, “This is the land of which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, ‘I will give it to your offspring.’ I have let you see it with your eyes, but you shall not go over there.” [5] So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the LORD, [6] and he buried him in the valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth-peor; but no one knows the place of his burial to this day. [7] Moses was 120 years old when he died. His eye was undimmed, and his vigor unabated. [8] And the people of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days. Then the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.

[9] And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands on him. So the people of Israel obeyed him and did as the LORD had commanded Moses. [10] And there has not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face, [11] none like him for all the signs and the wonders that the LORD sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and to all his servants and to all his land, [12] and for all the mighty power and all the great deeds of terror that Moses did in the sight of all Israel.

## Epistle [Heb 3:1‑6 ESV; sermon text]

[1] Therefore, holy brothers, you who share in a heavenly calling, consider Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession, [2] who was faithful to him who appointed him, just as Moses also was faithful in all God's house. [3] For Jesus has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses—as much more glory as the builder of a house has more honor than the house itself. [4] (For every house is built by someone, but the builder of all things is God.) [5] Now Moses was faithful in all God's house as a servant, to testify to the things that were to be spoken later, [6] but Christ is faithful over God's house as a son. And we are his house if indeed we hold fast our confidence and our boasting in our hope.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 9:28‑36 ESV]

[28] Now about eight days after these sayings he took with him Peter and John and James and went up on the mountain to pray. [29] And as he was praying, the appearance of his face was altered, and his clothing became dazzling white. [30] And behold, two men were talking with him, Moses and Elijah, [31] who appeared in glory and spoke of his departure, which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem. [32] Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep, but when they became fully awake they saw his glory and the two men who stood with him. [33] And as the men were parting from him, Peter said to Jesus, “Master, it is good that we are here. Let us make three tents, one for you and one for Moses and one for Elijah”—not knowing what he said. [34] As he was saying these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud. [35] And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is my Son, my Chosen One; listen to him!” [36] And when the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone. And they kept silent and told no one in those days anything of what they had seen.

## Introit [Ps 84:1‑2, 9, 11; antiphon: Ps 84:4]

> Blessèd are those who dwell | in your house,*  
> ever sing- | ing your praise!  
> How lovely is your | dwelling place,*  
> O | LORD of hosts!  
> My soul longs, yes, faints for the courts | of the LORD;*  
> my heart and flesh sing for joy to the | living God.
> Behold our shield, | O God;*  
> look on the face of your a- | nointed!  
> For the LORD God is a sun and shield; the LORD bestows favor and | honor.*  
> No good thing does he withhold from those who walk up- | rightly.
	
## Collect

O God, in the glorious transfiguration of Your beloved Son You confirmed the mysteries of the faith by the testimony of Moses and Elijah. In the voice that came from the bright cloud You wonderfully foreshadowed our adoption by grace. Mercifully make us co‑heirs with the King in His glory and bring us to the fullness of our inheritance in heaven; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 135 _Tis Good, Lord, to be Here_
* Sermon hymn: _LSB_ 413 _O Wondrous Type! O Vision Fair_
* Closing hymn: _TSC_ 1 _How Great Thou Art_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, **Moses was 120 years old when he died. His eye was undimmed, and his vigor unabated** [(Dt 34:7)](http://www.esvbible.org/Deuteronomy%2034%3A7/). I am looking forward to watching “The Ten Commandments” movie with you on Wednesdays—it will be all about Moses leading the Israelites out of Egyptian slavery and into the Promised Land. And there you have it in our Old Testament reading: the death of Moses. We know how it ends: **Moses was 120 years old when he died. His eye was undimmed, and his vigor unabated.** Our bodies to grow weak and then we die, but not so for Moses. I imagine he literally dropped dead, but in excellent health up to that moment.

And I would like to say that I admire you older Unity members for your vigor. You regularly come to church, maintain the church, take on projects, and—God forbid but I know this has happened—you even climb ladders like Moses must have when he was 120. I want to be like you other than I think I should not climb ladders when I am old. What makes me happy about all this is that you look better than you should. “You don't look a day over 70.” But you're in your 80's or even over 90! Thanks be to God for your good health and vigor. You are full of surprises! We may want to start an I-want-to-be-like-Moses guild some day, and I would not be surprised. But I _would_ be surprised if you _glowed_ like Moses did when he was with Jesus on the Mount of Transfiguration.

As for Moses, you can certainly say that he had an outstanding career as prophet and leader of the people of Israel. There was none like him, and if his presence with Jesus at the Mount of Transfiguration is any clue, Moses was inducted into the Bible Hall of Fame, if there was one. From our Holy Gospel:

> **And as [Jesus] was praying, the appearance of his face was altered, and his clothing became dazzling white. And behold, two men were talking with him, _Moses_ and Elijah.** [(Lk 9:29‑30 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%209%3A29-30/)

Yet for all the recognition given by God to Moses, we cannot forget the reason he died that day on Mount Nebo. Moses died on Mount Nebo because he had rebelled against God in the wilderness. _Moses was not good enough to enter the Promised Land._ He had sinned in public against God's Word when he _struck_ the rock at Meribah to give the thirsty Israelites water to drink. The LORD had said, **“Take the staff … and _tell_ the rock before their eyes to yield its water”** [(Nm 20:8 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Numbers%2020%3A8/), but he _struck_ the rock instead. Moses was to let the Word of God demonstrate its power on the rock, but instead he took matters in his own hands and **struck the rock with his staff twice** (Nm 20:11 ESV). He publicly disgraced the name of God by disobeying God's order to speak to the rock, and for this, the LORD said,


> **“Go up this mountain … , Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, opposite Jericho, and view the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the people of Israel for a possession. And die on the mountain which you go up, and be gathered to your people … _because you broke faith with me_ in the midst of the people of Israel at the waters of Meribah-kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin, and because you did not treat me as holy in the midst of the people of Israel. For you shall see the land before you, but you shall not go there, into the land that I am giving to the people of Israel.”** [(Dt 32:49‑52 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Deuteronomy%2032%3A49-52/)

So, if you think of Moses as a great prophet, you are right. But if you think his good works got him to be with Jesus on the Mount of Transfiguration, you are wrong. Moses good works could not even get him into the land of Canaan, not to mention heaven. It is only by the grace of God that Moses is glowing with Jesus, and as the Father's voice says in the cloud, it is only _because of Jesus_ that Moses is glowing with Jesus: **“This is my Son, my Chosen One; listen to him!”** [(Lk 9:35 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%209%3A35/)

Moses and Elijah are talking with Jesus about the Cross, the departure which Jesus was about to accomplish at Jerusalem (Lk 9:31). It is through the Cross that Moses and Elijah entered their glory and, beloved in the Lord, it is throught the Cross—and _only_ through the Cross—that you, too will share in that glory.

You all have beautiful faces that I am happy to see at all times.

I have observed our members' faces after their final hour, and every once in a while I see the final disposition of the face to be what causes some people to say, “Look, he looks so peaceful.” Sometimes it happens, sometimes not, but I think of it as a hint of the transfiguration from mortal man to immortal man. I have never experienced it, but I hope to by faith in Jesus. We know that Moses and Elijah experienced it, for they are on the mountain together with Jesus. Moses never lost his strength, but nevertheless he died. Elijah, the Bible tells us, never died at all [(2Ki 2:1‑12)](http://www.esvbible.org/2%20Kings%202%3A1-12/), but he was born mortal and somehow his mortal body was transformed to an immortal body without experiencing death at all. Christ's Transfiguration shows not only who He is, but who we will be with Him, together with Moses and Elijah.

If I should be with you in your final hour, I will not be surprised if you glow—if you face shows a trace of who you are with: Jesus in heaven.

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>BOAST OF GLORY THAT WILL BE YOURS.</center>

1. Moses is an outstanding prophet.
    1. Physically strong until the day he died.
    1. Appears with Jesus on the Mount of Transfiguration.
    1. But he died for publicly breaking faith with God at Meribah (Dt 32:51; Nm 20:8‑13).
1. He shares Jesus' glory on the Mount of Transfiguration through the Cross (Lk 9:31).
    1. Jesus has more glory than Moses (Heb 3:3).
    1. Jesus is the builder, Moses is the house.
    1. Jesus is the builder, you are the house.
1. You live in the hope of sharing Jesus' glory.
    1. Put your hope in it.
    1. Might as well boast of it. _O wondrous type! O vision fair Of glory that the Church may share._
    1. You may experience it already in your final hour.

## Notes

Dt 34:4. Moses sees the Promised Land but is not allowed to enter it.

Dt 34:7. Moses dies without having lost his physical strength or eyesight.

Dt 34:9. I forgot that Moses literally laid his hands on Joshua.

Dt 34:10. The LORD knew Moses face-to-face. Moses' face glowed when he spoke with Him [(Ex 34:29‑35)](http://www.esvbible.org/Exodus%2034%3A29-35/).

Heb 3:6. Boasting. Really? Yes.

The Transfiguration implies that Jesus is God.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
