<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 4th Sunday of Easter

## Prior to service

Introduce Matins.

* p32. Speak versicles; sing responses. That will be it for the first-day introduction.

## During the service

* Desirée is reader.
* After the service, Rich Thoma will announce Family Fun Night on 4/30.

## Announcements

* Paraments are red today because we are celebrating Unity's 102nd anniversary (actual first day of worship as Unity = April 19th, 1914)
* This morning, I will begin to introduce Matins to you before the beginning of the service.
We will use the Matins service printed in the red hymnal.
The goal is to begin using Matins once a month on a non-Communion Sunday.
We will begin to use it once the congregation is comfortable with it.
* Wednesday afternoon Bible study will reconvene not this Wedneday, April 13, but on Wednesday, April 20 at 4:30 p.m.
We will watch two Easter movies, *Dawn of Victory* and *The Nail*,
and compare them to what is written in the Bible.

## First Reading [Ac 20:17-35 ESV]

[17] Now from Miletus he sent to Ephesus and called the elders of the church to come to him. [18] And when they came to him, he said to them:

“You yourselves know how I lived among you the whole time from the first day that I set foot in Asia, [19] serving the Lord with all humility and with tears and with trials that happened to me through the plots of the Jews; [20] how I did not shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, and teaching you in public and from house to house, [21] testifying both to Jews and to Greeks of repentance toward God and of faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. [22] And now, behold, I am going to Jerusalem, constrained by the Spirit, not knowing what will happen to me there, [23] except that the Holy Spirit testifies to me in every city that imprisonment and afflictions await me. [24] But I do not account my life of any value nor as precious to myself, if only I may finish my course and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to testify to the gospel of the grace of God. [25] And now, behold, I know that none of you among whom I have gone about proclaiming the kingdom will see my face again. [26] Therefore I testify to you this day that I am innocent of the blood of all, [27] for I did not shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of God. [28] Pay careful attention to yourselves and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to care for the church of God, which he obtained with his own blood. [29] I know that after my departure fierce wolves will come in among you, not sparing the flock; [30] and from among your own selves will arise men speaking twisted things, to draw away the disciples after them. [31] Therefore be alert, remembering that for three years I did not cease night or day to admonish every one with tears. [32] And now I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified. [33] I coveted no one's silver or gold or apparel. [34] You yourselves know that these hands ministered to my necessities and to those who were with me. [35] In all things I have shown you that by working hard in this way we must help the weak and remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he himself said, ‘It is more blessed to give than to receive.’”

## Epistle [Rv 7:9-17 ESV; sermon text]

[9] After this I looked, and behold, a great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands, [10] and crying out with a loud voice, “Salvation belongs to our God who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!” [11] And all the angels were standing around the throne and around the elders and the four living creatures, and they fell on their faces before the throne and worshiped God, [12] saying, “Amen! Blessing and glory and wisdom and thanksgiving and honor and power and might be to our God forever and ever! Amen.”

[13] Then one of the elders addressed me, saying, “Who are these, clothed in white robes, and from where have they come?” [14] I said to him, “Sir, you know.” And he said to me, “These are the ones coming out of the great tribulation. They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

> [15] “Therefore they are before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple; and he who sits on the throne will shelter them with his presence.	[16] They shall hunger no more, neither thirst anymore; the sun shall not strike them, nor any scorching heat.	[17] For the Lamb in the midst of the throne will be their shepherd, and he will guide them to springs of living water, and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.”

## Holy Gospel [Jn 10:22-30 ESV]

[22] At that time the Feast of Dedication took place at Jerusalem. It was winter, [23] and Jesus was walking in the temple, in the colonnade of Solomon. [24] So the Jews gathered around him and said to him, “How long will you keep us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly.” [25] Jesus answered them, “I told you, and you do not believe. The works that I do in my Father's name bear witness about me, [26] but you do not believe because you are not among my sheep. [27] My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. [28] I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand. [29] My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all, and no one is able to snatch them out of the Father's hand. [30] I and the Father are one.”

## Introit [Ps 78:70-72;79:13 antiphon: John 10:14, 15b]

> I am the good | shepherd.*  
> I know my own and my own know me, and I lay down my life | for the sheep.  
> He chose David his servant and took him from the | sheepfolds;*  
> from following the nursing ewes he brought him to shepherd Jacob his people, Israel his in- | heritance.  
> With upright heart he shep- | herded them*  
> and guided them with his | skillful hand.  
> But we your people, the sheep of your pasture, will give thanks to you for- | ever;*  
> from generation to generation we will re- | count your praise.

## Collect

Almighty God, merciful Father,
since You have wakened from death the Shepherd of Your sheep,
grant us Your Holy Spirit
that when we hear the voice of our Shepherd
we may know Him who calls us each by name
and follow where He leads;
through the same Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 195 _Christ Jesus Lay in Death's Strong Bands_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 656 _Behold a Host, Arrayed in White_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 639 _For Many Years, O God of Grace_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, every once in a while you hear the apostle John say in the book of Revelation, **“After this I looked, and behold!”**
and you know he saw something special.
In chapter 4 he says, **“After this I looked, and behold, a door standing open in heaven!”** [(Rv 4:1 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation%204%3A1/)—a view into heaven and we get to hear about it!
Today, in chapter 7, he says,

> **“After this I looked, and behold, a great multitude that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands, and crying out with a loud voice, ‘Salvation belongs to our God who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!’”**

It is one thing that John saw heaven and told you about it—after all, heaven is for real—but it is a much better thing that John saw heaven and *saw you in it*.
For there you are, a part of **a great multitude that no one could number**—and surely more than 144,000. There you are, wearing white, with palm branches in your hands.
There you are, praising the Father and the Son.
This vision of heaven is *for you*.
It is clear that Jesus rose from the dead and went to heaven.
It is clear that He is to be praised for that.
But to know that it is *you* there standing before His throne and praising Him—to know *that* is to know that He rose from the dead *for you*.

> **“In my Father's house are many rooms. If it were not so, would I have told you that I go to prepare a place for you?”** [(Jn 14:2 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/John+14:2/)

Beloved in the Lord, rejoice in what Jesus has done for you—rejoice in what Jesus has *won* for you.
“He has redeemed me, a lost and condemned person, purchased and won me
from all sins, from death, and from the power of the devil. …
that I may be His own and live under Him in His kingdom and serve Him in everlasting righteousness, innocence, and blessedness,
*just as He is risen from the dead*, lives and reigns to all eternity.
This is most certainly true!”

What now? This brings us to the little conversation between the heavenly elder and John:

> **Then one of the elders addressed [John], saying, “Who are these, clothed in white robes, and from where have they come?” [John] said to him, “Sir, you know.” And he said to [John], “These are the ones coming out of the _great tribulation_. They have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.”**

There is the catch: the great tribulation.
Most of you have suffered in your life; some of you are suffering now.
Is this the great tribulation?
There is no doubt that Christians throughout the ages has suffered tribulation and trouble.
However, hear the word of our Lord recorded in Matthew, chapter 24,
**“For then there will be _great tribulation_, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, and never will be. And if those days had not been cut short, no human being would be saved. But for the sake of the elect those days will be cut short”** [(Mt 24:21‑22 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Matthew%2024%3A21-22/).

Beloved in the Lord, taking direction from our Lord Himself, let us turn our attention to the trouble that is yet to come—the great tribulation after which we will be joyous before the throne of God in heaven.
Some of the great tribulation is described in the book of Revelation.
*[Illustration]* I am reminded of it every time I take out my credit card with the new chip.
You do not swipe these cards anymore: you insert the side of the card with the chip into the reader and do not take it out until your transaction is complete.
I fully expect the day will come when you cannot buy or sell anything without this chip because of what John foresaw in Revelation, chapter 13:

> **Then I saw another beast rising out of the earth. It had two horns like a lamb and it spoke like a dragon. It exercises all the authority of the first beast in its presence, and makes the earth and its inhabitants worship the first beast, whose mortal wound was healed. It performs great signs, even making fire come down from heaven to earth in front of people, and by the signs that it is allowed to work in the presence of the beast it deceives those who dwell on earth, telling them to make an image for the beast that was wounded by the sword and yet lived. And it was allowed to give breath to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast might even speak and might cause those who would not worship the image of the beast to be slain. Also it causes all, both small and great, both rich and poor, both free and slave, to be _marked on the right hand or the forehead, so that no one can buy or sell unless he has the mark_, that is, the name of the beast or the number of its name. This calls for wisdom: let the one who has understanding calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.** [(Rv 13:11‑18 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation%2013%3A11-18/)

Beloved in the Lord, John foresaw what was to come and warned us

It is a time of repentance.



> **And another angel, a third, followed them, saying with a loud voice, “If anyone worships the beast and its image and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand, he also will drink the wine of God's wrath, poured full strength into the cup of his anger, and he will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels and in the presence of the Lamb.** [(Rv 14:9‑10 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation%2014%3A9-10/)


It will take faith.

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
