<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# Holy Trinity

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Jen is reader
* Athanasian Creed

## Announcements

* ZZZ

## Old Testament [Pr 8:1-4, 22‑31 ESV]

> [1] Does not wisdom call?  
> Does not understanding raise her voice?  
> [2] On the heights beside the way,  
> at the crossroads she takes her stand;  
> [3] beside the gates in front of the town,  
> at the entrance of the portals she cries aloud:  
> [4] “To you, O men, I call,  
> and my cry is to the children of man.
	
> [22] “The LORD possessed me at the beginning of his work,  
> the first of his acts of old.  
> [23] Ages ago I was set up,  
> at the first, before the beginning of the earth.  
> [24] When there were no depths I was brought forth,  
> when there were no springs abounding with water.  
> [25] Before the mountains had been shaped,  
> before the hills, I was brought forth,  
> [26] before he had made the earth with its fields,  
> or the first of the dust of the world.  
> [27] When he established the heavens, I was there;  
> when he drew a circle on the face of the deep,  
> [28] when he made firm the skies above,  
> when he established the fountains of the deep,  
> [29] when he assigned to the sea its limit,  
> so that the waters might not transgress his command,  
> when he marked out the foundations of the earth,  
> [30] then I was beside him, like a master workman,  
> and I was daily his delight,  
> rejoicing before him always,  
> [31] rejoicing in his inhabited world  
> and delighting in the children of man.
	
## Epistle [Ac 2:14a, 22-36 ESV; sermon text]

[14] But Peter, standing with the eleven, lifted up his voice and addressed them:

[22] &ldquo;Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a man attested to you by God with mighty works and wonders and signs that God did through him in your midst, as you yourselves know&mdash;[23] this Jesus, delivered up according to the definite plan and foreknowledge of God, you crucified and killed by the hands of lawless men. [24] God raised him up, loosing the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by it. [25] For David says concerning him,

> &ldquo;&lsquo;I saw the Lord always before me,  
> for he is at my right hand that I may not be shaken;  
> [26] therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced;  
> my flesh also will dwell in hope.  
> [27] For you will not abandon my soul to Hades,  
> or let your Holy One see corruption.  
> [28] You have made known to me the paths of life;  
> you will make me full of gladness with your presence.&rsquo;

[29] &ldquo;Brothers, I may say to you with confidence about the patriarch David that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day. [30] Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants on his throne, [31] he foresaw and spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that he was not abandoned to Hades, nor did his flesh see corruption. [32] This Jesus God raised up, and of that we all are witnesses. [33] Being therefore exalted at the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this that you yourselves are seeing and hearing. [34] For David did not ascend into the heavens, but he himself says,

> &ldquo;&lsquo;The Lord said to my Lord,  
> &ldquo;Sit at my right hand,  
> [35] 	until I make your enemies your footstool.&rdquo;&rsquo;

[36] Let all the house of Israel therefore know for certain that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.&rdquo;

## Holy Gospel [Jn 8:48-59 ESV]

[48] The Jews answered him, &ldquo;Are we not right in saying that you are a Samaritan and have a demon?&rdquo; [49] Jesus answered, &ldquo;I do not have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me. [50] Yet I do not seek my own glory; there is One who seeks it, and he is the judge. [51] Truly, truly, I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.&rdquo; [52] The Jews said to him, &ldquo;Now we know that you have a demon! Abraham died, as did the prophets, yet you say, ‘If anyone keeps my word, he will never taste death.&rsquo; [53] Are you greater than our father Abraham, who died? And the prophets died! Who do you make yourself out to be?&rdquo; [54] Jesus answered, &ldquo;If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say, &lsquo;He is our God.&rsquo; [55] But you have not known him. I know him. If I were to say that I do not know him, I would be a liar like you, but I do know him and I keep his word. [56] Your father Abraham rejoiced that he would see my day. He saw it and was glad.&rdquo; [57] So the Jews said to him, &ldquo;You are not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?&rdquo; [58] Jesus said to them, &ldquo;Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I am.&rdquo; [59] So they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple.

## Introit [Ps 16:8-11; antiphon: Liturgical Text]

> Blessed be the Holy Trinity and the undivided | Unity.*  
> Let us give glory to him because he has shown his mer- | cy to us. 
> I have set the LORD always be- | fore me;*
> because he is at my right hand, I shall not be | shaken.
> Therefore my heart is glad, and my whole being re- | joices;*
> my flesh also | dwells secure.
> For you will not abandon my soul | to Sheol,*
> or let your holy one see cor- | ruption.
> You make known to me the | path of life;*
> in your presence there is fullness of joy; at your right hand are pleasures for- | evermore.

## Athanasian Creed

> Whoever desires to be saved must, above all, hold the catholic faith.  
> Whoever does not keep it whole and undefiled will without doubt perish eternally.  
> And the catholic faith is this,  
> that we worship one God in trinity and Trinity in unity,  
> neither confusing the persons nor dividing the substance.  
> For the Father is one person, the Son is another,  
>     and the Holy Spirit is another.
> But the Godhead of the Father and of the Son  
>     and of the Holy Spirit is one: the glory equal, the majesty coeternal.  
> Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Spirit:  
> the Father uncreated, the Son uncreated, the Holy Spirit uncreated;  
> the Father infinite, the Son infinite, the Holy Spirit infinite;  
> the Father eternal, the Son eternal, the Holy Spirit eternal.  
> And yet there are not three Eternals, but one Eternal,  
> just as there are not three Uncreated or three Infinites,  
>     but one Uncreated and one Infinite.  
> In the same way, the Father is almighty, the Son almighty,  
>     the Holy Spirit almighty;  
> and yet there are not three Almighties but one Almighty.  
> So the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Spirit is God;  
> and yet there are not three Gods, but one God.  
> So the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, the Holy Spirit is Lord;  
> and yet there are not three Lords, but one Lord.  
> Just as we are compelled by the Christian truth  
>     to acknowledge each distinct person as God and Lord,  
> so also are we prohibited by the catholic religion to say that there are  
>     three Gods or Lords.  
> The Father is not made nor created nor begotten by anyone.  
>     The Son is neither made nor created,  
>     but begotten of the Father alone.  
> The Holy Spirit is of the Father and of the Son,  
>     neither made nor created nor begotten but proceeding.  
> Thus, there is one Father, not three Fathers;  
>     one Son, not three Sons; one Holy Spirit, not three Holy Spirits.  
> And in this Trinity none is before or after another;  
>     none is greater or less than another;  
> but the whole three persons are coeternal with each other  
>     and coequal so that in all things, as has been stated above,  
>     the Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity is to be worshiped.  
> Therefore, whoever desires to be saved must think thus  
>     about the Trinity.

> But it is also necessary for everlasting salvation that one  
>     faithfully believe the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.  
> Therefore, it is the right faith that we believe and confess that our Lord  
>     Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is at the same time both God and man.  
> He is God, begotten from the substance of the Father before all ages;  
>     and He is man, born of the substance of His mother in this age:  
> perfect God and perfect man, composed of a rational soul and human flesh;  
> equal to the Father with respect to His divinity,  
>     less than the Father with respect to His humanity.
> Although He is God and man, He is not two, but one Christ:  
> one, however, not by the conversion of the divinity into flesh  
>     but by the assumption of the humanity into God;  
> one altogether, not by confusion of substance,  
>     but by unity of person.  
> For as the rational soul and flesh is one man,  
>     so God and man is one Christ,  
> who suffered for our salvation, descended into hell,
>     rose again on the third day from the dead,  
> ascended into heaven, and is seated at the right hand of the Father,  
> from whence He will come to judge the living and the dead.  
> At His coming all people will rise again with their bodies  
>     and give an account concerning their own deeds.  
> And those who have done good will enter into eternal life,  
>     and those who have done evil into eternal fire.  
> This is the catholic faith; whoever does not believe it faithfully  
>     and firmly cannot be saved.

## Collect

Almighty and everlasting God,
You have given us grace
to acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trinity
by the confession of a true faith
and to worship the Unity in the power of the Divine Majesty.
Keep us steadfast in this faith
and defend us from all adversities;
for You, O Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, live and reign,
one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 246 _Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 250 _Holy God, We Praise Thy Name_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 245 _God Loved the World So that He Gave_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 252 _We All Believe in One True God_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, today is Trinity Sunday.
We believe, according to the revelation of the Bible, that the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God.

> Such as the Father is, such is the Son, and such is the Holy Spirit:  
> the Father uncreated, the Son uncreated, the Holy Spirit uncreated;  
> the Father infinite, the Son infinite, the Holy Spirit infinite;  
> the Father eternal, the Son eternal, the Holy Spirit eternal.

But it seems to me&mdash;and it may seem to you&mdash;that the Athanasian Creed, which we confess to be God&#x2011;given truth, is complicated, and even troubling because it seems to make salvation complicated:

> In this Trinity none is before or after another;  
>     none is greater or less than another;  
> but the whole three persons are coeternal with each other  
>     and coequal so that in all things, &#x2026;  
>     the Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity is to be worshiped.  
> Therefore, *whoever desires to be saved must think thus*  
>     about the Trinity.

My intention today, beloved in the Lord, is to boil it down.
I must confess that even I was troubled by the Athanasian Creed until I went to seminary.
I had heard this creed read aloud on Trinity Sunday and concluded that unless I understand this jabbering, I cannot be saved.
For I would rather stick with **&ldquo;For God so loved the world &#x2026; but have eternal life&rdquo;** [(Jn&nbsp;3:16)](http://www.esvbible.org/John%203%3A16/) and be saved.
I would rather stick with **&ldquo;Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved&rdquo;** [(Mk 16:16)](http://www.esvbible.org/Mark%2016%3A16/).
That is correct.
Beloved in the Lord, whatever the Bible says clearly and concisely, *believe in it with all your heart*.

Our Holy Gospel this morning is yet another clear and concise statement from the mouth of our Lord: **“Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, _I am_”** [(Jn 8:58)](http://www.esvbible.org/John%208%3A58/).
That is an ungrammatical thing to say: **“I am”** instead of **“I was.”**
Did the Jews want to stone Jesus for not speaking grammatically?
No, the Jews wanted to stone Him because He used God's name **_Yahweh_**—**_I am_**—He used God's Name for Himself.
Jesus says He's God: **“Before Abraham was, _I am_”**!
If He were crucified, buried and stayed in the grave, we would say He was crazy.
But He was raised from the dead, ascended into heaven, and poured out the Holy Spirit, as He promised.
We believe He is God, just as He said, just as He is risen from the grave, lives and reigns to all eternity. This is most certainly true.

The good news for sinners is that *God Himself* died on the Cross!
He did not pick a creature to die on the Cross for our sins, He died on the Cross Himself to demonstrate how much He loves us sinners!
*[Illustration]* If your child were drowning, would you Google *lifeguard* on your cell phone and call for help because you are too busy or distracted to save your child?
No, you would jump in and save him.
God jumped in to save us when He sent His Son to be born of the virgin Mary.
God jumped in to save us when He was tempted by Satan just as we are.
God jumped in to save us when He gladly took the punishment we deserve—that price was paid by His own skin and innocent suffering and death!
If Jesus, who died on the Cross for our sins, were *not* God, we would be left to wonder why would a man's crucifixion do any good for us.
The poor guy should have kept his mouth shut and stuck around to write some useful books.

Beloved in the Lord, Jesus came not to write books: He came to die!

> [Jesus] is God, begotten from the substance of the Father before all ages;  
>     and He is man, born of the substance of His mother in this age:  
> perfect God and perfect man, …  
> equal to the Father with respect to His divinity,  
>     less than the Father with respect to His humanity.

As God, He could never die as a man on the Cross for our sins.
In that way, Jesus is *less than the Father with respect to His humanity*.
But as man, He was tempted as we are, He suffered as we do, and He died as we do,
but His death was a substitutionary punishment for the sins of all man.
No man could pay that price; only God can [(Ps 49:7‑9)](http://www.esvbible.org/Psalm%2049%3A7-9/).

The point is that the Athanasian Creed is not jabbering: it protects those simple verses that you believe for your salvation.
Those who would say Jesus is not God take away His Crucifixion atoning for your sins, for only God can pay that price.
Those who would say that Jesus is not man would take away His Crucifixion again, for God cannot die.
The Athanasian, Nicene, and Apostles' Creeds are careful statements that connect you to Christ's command to baptize **in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit**;
these creeds are careful statements so that you would know who God is that saved you when He died on the Cross for your sins and who God is that baptized you in His Name.
Your salvation is not complicated: you are saved as sure as Jesus was crucified and raised from the dead for you.
The creeds protect your faith. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Pr 8:22. Footnote in *Lutheran Study Bible* quotes Justin Martyr (100-165): “The Word of Wisdom, who is Himself this God begotten of the Father of all things, and Word, and Wisdom, and Power, and the Glory of the Begetter, will bear evidence to me, when He speaks by Solomon” (*ANF* 1:227).

Pr 8:31. The Son delights not only in creation, but especially in the children of man.

Ac 2:31. This is the first time in Acts that the term *the Christ* is used.
The Christ would deliver and rule God's people.

Ac 2:33. A picture of the Holy Spirit in action.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
