<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# The Day of Pentecost

## During the service

* Baptism of Marilin Saluveer
* No Matins practice because of Baptism
* LeRoy Peterson (Gideons) will say a few words at end of service

## Announcements

* Verna is much the same as last week.
* We will not practice Matins this morning because we have visitors for a Baptism.
* There is a Gideons International insert in your bulletins.
Mr LeRoy Peterson will say a few words at the end of service and then speak for about 10 minutes at the beginning of Bible study downstairs. 
  Included in the insert is a tear-off envelope. If you would like to give a donation to the Gideons, you can use that envelope
  and place it in the offering plate on the table in the narthex when you leave.

## Old Testament Reading [Gen:11:1-9 ESV]

[1] Now the whole earth had one language and the same words. [2] And as people migrated from the east, they found a plain in the land of Shinar and settled there. [3] And they said to one another, “Come, let us make bricks, and burn them thoroughly.” And they had brick for stone, and bitumen for mortar. [4] Then they said, “Come, let us build ourselves a city and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a name for ourselves, lest we be dispersed over the face of the whole earth.” [5] And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of man had built. [6] And the Lord said, “Behold, they are one people, and they have all one language, and this is only the beginning of what they will do. And nothing that they propose to do will now be impossible for them. [7] Come, let us go down and there confuse their language, so that they may not understand one another's speech.” [8] So the Lord dispersed them from there over the face of all the earth, and they left off building the city. [9] Therefore its name was called Babel, because there the Lord confused the language of all the earth. And from there the Lord dispersed them over the face of all the earth.

## Epistle [Acts 2:1-21 ESV; sermon text]

[1] When the day of Pentecost arrived, they were all together in one place. [2] And suddenly there came from heaven a sound like a mighty rushing wind, and it filled the entire house where they were sitting. [3] And divided tongues as of fire appeared to them and rested on each one of them. [4] And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.
[5] Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men from every nation under heaven. [6] And at this sound the multitude came together, and they were bewildered, because each one was hearing them speak in his own language. [7] And they were amazed and astonished, saying, “Are not all these who are speaking Galileans? [8] And how is it that we hear, each of us in his own native language? [9] Parthians and Medes and Elamites and residents of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, [10] Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya belonging to Cyrene, and visitors from Rome, [11] both Jews and proselytes, Cretans and Arabians—we hear them telling in our own tongues the mighty works of God.” [12] And all were amazed and perplexed, saying to one another, “What does this mean?” [13] But others mocking said, “They are filled with new wine.”
[14] But Peter, standing with the eleven, lifted up his voice and addressed them: “Men of Judea and all who dwell in Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and give ear to my words. [15] For these people are not drunk, as you suppose, since it is only the third hour of the day. [16] But this is what was uttered through the prophet Joel:
[17] “‘And in the last days it shall be, God declares,
that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh,
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
    and your young men shall see visions,
    and your old men shall dream dreams;
[18] even on my male servants and female servants
    in those days I will pour out my Spirit, and they shall prophesy.
[19] And I will show wonders in the heavens above
    and signs on the earth below,
    blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke;
[20] the sun shall be turned to darkness
    and the moon to blood,
    before the day of the Lord comes, the great and magnificent day.
[21] And it shall come to pass that everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.’

## Holy Gospel [John 14:23-31 ESV]

[23] Jesus answered him, “If anyone loves me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our home with him. [24] Whoever does not love me does not keep my words. And the word that you hear is not mine but the Father's who sent me.
[25] “These things I have spoken to you while I am still with you. [26] But the Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you. [27] Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you. Not as the world gives do I give to you. Let not your hearts be troubled, neither let them be afraid. [28] You heard me say to you, ‘I am going away, and I will come to you.’ If you loved me, you would have rejoiced, because I am going to the Father, for the Father is greater than I. [29] And now I have told you before it takes place, so that when it does take place you may believe. [30] I will no longer talk much with you, for the ruler of this world is coming. He has no claim on me, [31] but I do as the Father has commanded me, so that the world may know that I love the Father. Rise, let us go from here.

## Introit [Ps 104:24, 27-28, 30; antiphon: Liturgical Text]

> Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of the | faithful,*  
> and kindle in them the fire of your love. Alle- | luia. 
> O LORD, how manifold are your works! In wisdom have you | made them all;*  
> the earth is full of your | creatures.  
> These all | look to you,*  
> to give them their food in due | season.  
> When you give it to them, they gath- | er it up;*  
> when you open your hand, they are filled with | good things.  
> When you send forth your Spirit, they are cre- | ated,*  
> and you renew the face | of the ground.  

## Collect

O God,
on this day You once taught the hearts of Your faithful people
by sending them the light of Your Holy Spirit.
Grant us in our day by the same Spirit
to have a right understanding in all things
and evermore to rejoice in His holy consolation
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord,
who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit,
one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 226 _Come, Oh, Come, Thou Quickening Spirit stnzs 1-5_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 301 _He that Believes and is Baptized_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 234 _Holy Ghost, with Light Divine_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, we cannot thank Jesus enough for the gift that He promised before He ascended into heaven:

> **“The Helper, the Holy Spirit, _whom the Father will send in my name_, he will teach you all things and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you.”** [(Jn 14:26)](http://www.esvbible.org/John%2014%3A26/)

There you have it: the Holy Spirit is the promised Helper from heaven who brings to your remembrance all that *Jesus* has said to you.

Of all of that which has been said, I invite you to consider two things: consider what Jesus has said to you and consider what was said at the tower of Babel.
At the tower of Babel,

> **The whole earth had one language and the same words. … And they said to one another, “Come, let us make bricks, … Come, let us build ourselves a city and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a name for ourselves, … And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of man had built. And the Lord said, “Behold, they are one people, and they have all one language, … And nothing that they propose to do will now be impossible for them.”** [(Gn 11:1‑6)](http://www.esvbible.org/Genesis%2011%3A1-6/)

And that's a fact: nothing is impossible for man when we share one language.
The ancient people would have succeeded in building a tower to heaven that even we would marvel at by our modern standards.	
The outcome of those things that were said—**“Come, let us make bricks, … Come, let us build ourselves a city and a tower … let us make a name for ourselves”**—the outcome would have been human achievement at a level that would even amaze us today, and the name of man would have been honored like that of God Himself.
However, God was not pleased with this plan, for it seems to have been a plan of sinful ambition—the ambition for man be his own god—so the true God mercifully confused our language. The tower was left unfinished.	

What we learn is that man's sinful ambition combined with a common language is a powerful force for evil, and God has an eye on it.
It has happened many times before and it will happen again.
It happens today.
_[Illustration]_ Today, in our own back yard, man seeks freedom from God-instituted marriage between a man and his wife—sexual freedom has been the sinful ambition pursued by man for decades.
It has gained momentum for generations, but has now gained super-strength by a *common language*—language like “marriage equality” and “transgender”—language not revealed by God, but invented by man—language made the law of the land and forced on children by our own President and Supreme Court. But **we must obey God rather than men** [(Ac 5:29)](http://www.esvbible.org/Acts+5:29/).
And, again, may He mercifully confuse this plan before the tower is finished.
And so it goes for what was said at the tower of Babel or with *any* sinful ambition of man fueled by a common language—may God mercifully confuse the plan before the tower is finished, or may Christ Himself return and put an end to it.

But, thanks be to God that He is building His own tower.
Thanks be to God that He has sent His own language into man's mess to build His own heavenly home—God has sent His own language to build His Church, His New Jerusalem [(Rv 21:2)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation+21:2/).
And you may ask, “How does God use language to build His Church?”
Look no further than the chapter after Babel.
In Genesis, chapter 12, God calls an old man in his seventies to leave his hometown, Ur of the Chaldeans—a town not far from the unfinished tower of Babel.
The language of God to build His Church is heard by the ear of Abram, who was an idolater [(Jsh 24:2)](http://www.esvbible.org/Joshua%2024%3A2/) like the men who built the tower of Babel:

> **Now the LORD said to Abram, “Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and _I will bless you and make your name great_, so that you will be a blessing. … and in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed.”** [(Gn 12:1‑3 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Genesis%2012%3A1-3/)

The Lord gave Abram different language to listen to, and everything that God said, and Abram believed, came to pass.
But what a lowly way for God to put His language into action—tell an old man to take his wife and move out of their retirement home to a strange land, and promise to make his name great, and promise that all the families of the earth will be blessed in him.
But this is *God* at work, not man.
God made a far-fetched promise to an old man.
_[Illustration]_ If we had witnessed it we might have thought God was a telemarketer trying to rip off a senior citizen.
But God is far more noble than any man, and when He promises, you will do well to listen and take action.
That is what Abram did:
he believed every Word God said and the Bible tells us that God accounted this to Abram as righteousness [(Gn 15:6)](http://www.esvbible.org/Genesis%2015%3A6/); to believe God's Word makes you righteous, too.
He believed God and became the father of Isaac; he believed God and became the grandfather of Jacob and great-grandfather of the tribes of Israel.
And it is from the tribe of Judah that our Savior Jesus Christ Himself descended and was made man, to be the One in whom all the families of the earth are blessed by being redeemed from sin, redeemed from death, redeemed from the power of the devil by the forgiveness of their sins.

By the Word of God, which Abram believed, he became Abraham, the father of many, and the father of our Savior Jesus Christ whose name *is* the Word of God Made Flesh—true God and true man, who was crucified in our place because of our defiance against God so that we could be declared forgiven and so that *God could build a Church for Himself*.
Now what Christ, the Word Himself, accomplished by His death and Resurrection is being constantly built upon by the Holy Spirit, whose pouring out we celebrate today on Pentecost.
The Holy Spirit is at work building the Church of Christ wherever penitent sinners come before God seeking forgiveness in His name.
Witness Marilin's own Baptism.
A young lady from Estonia comes before Christ, seeking forgiveness in His name and is washed with water in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
And though it may seem lowly—after all, it is just washing with water—it is *God's own work* accomplished by *God's own Word*, which makes it greater than all the accomplishments of man.
To this the Holy Spirit testifies.	
God has added Marilin to His Church, His Bride, His New Jerusalem.

Christ's Word is not like the word of man, but it it the power of God [(Rm 1:16)](http://www.esvbible.org/Romans%201%3A16/).
And we thank and praise God for pouring out the Holy Spirit on this day to testify to this. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Gn 11:7. “Let *us* go down there”—Trinity implied.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ

