<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 3rd Sunday of Easter

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* After the service, Rich Thoma will announce Family Fun Night on 4/30.
* After Rich's announcement, say this. You may remember that during the midweek Lenten service on the 4th Petition of the Lord's Prayer (**“Give us this day our daily bread.”**), some of you shared table prayers with me.
Please share them with me again!
I want to publish them in a table prayer booklet that we will provide
on Family Fun night on 4/30.
Please write them down and give them to Trina, or, better yet,
leave me a voice message where you speak the prayer, or send me
your prayer by email.

## Announcements

* (Wait for Governing Board feedback.) Next week, I will begin to introduce Matins to you before the beginning of the service.
We will use the Matins service printed in the red hymnal.
The goal is to begin using Matins once a month on a non-Communion Sunday.
We will begin to use it once the congregation is comfortable with it.

## First Reading [Ac 9:1-22 ESV]

[1] But Saul, still breathing threats and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest [2] and asked him for letters to the synagogues at Damascus, so that if he found any belonging to the Way, men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem. [3] Now as he went on his way, he approached Damascus, and suddenly a light from heaven shone around him. [4] And falling to the ground he heard a voice saying to him, “Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?” [5] And he said, “Who are you, Lord?” And he said, “I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting. [6] But rise and enter the city, and you will be told what you are to do.” [7] The men who were traveling with him stood speechless, hearing the voice but seeing no one. [8] Saul rose from the ground, and although his eyes were opened, he saw nothing. So they led him by the hand and brought him into Damascus. [9] And for three days he was without sight, and neither ate nor drank.

[10] Now there was a disciple at Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, “Ananias.” And he said, “Here I am, Lord.” [11] And the Lord said to him, “Rise and go to the street called Straight, and at the house of Judas look for a man of Tarsus named Saul, for behold, he is praying, [12] and he has seen in a vision a man named Ananias come in and lay his hands on him so that he might regain his sight.” [13] But Ananias answered, “Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much evil he has done to your saints at Jerusalem. [14] And here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name.” [15] But the Lord said to him, “Go, for he is a chosen instrument of mine to carry my name before the Gentiles and kings and the children of Israel. [16] For I will show him how much he must suffer for the sake of my name.” [17] So Ananias departed and entered the house. And laying his hands on him he said, “Brother Saul, the Lord Jesus who appeared to you on the road by which you came has sent me so that you may regain your sight and be filled with the Holy Spirit.” [18] And immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he regained his sight. Then he rose and was baptized; [19] and taking food, he was strengthened.

For some days he was with the disciples at Damascus. [20] And immediately he proclaimed Jesus in the synagogues, saying, “He is the Son of God.” [21] And all who heard him were amazed and said, “Is not this the man who made havoc in Jerusalem of those who called upon this name? And has he not come here for this purpose, to bring them bound before the chief priests?” [22] But Saul increased all the more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived in Damascus by proving that Jesus was the Christ.

## Epistle [Rv 5:1-14 ESV; sermon text]

[1] Then I saw in the right hand of him who was seated on the throne a scroll written within and on the back, sealed with seven seals. [2] And I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, “Who is worthy to open the scroll and break its seals?” [3] And no one in heaven or on earth or under the earth was able to open the scroll or to look into it, [4] and I began to weep loudly because no one was found worthy to open the scroll or to look into it. [5] And one of the elders said to me, “Weep no more; behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has conquered, so that he can open the scroll and its seven seals.”

[6] And between the throne and the four living creatures and among the elders I saw a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain, with seven horns and with seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent out into all the earth. [7] And he went and took the scroll from the right hand of him who was seated on the throne. [8] And when he had taken the scroll, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each holding a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints. [9] And they sang a new song, saying,

> “Worthy are you to take the scroll and to open its seals, for you were slain, and by your blood you ransomed people for God from every tribe and language and people and nation,	[10] and you have made them a kingdom and priests to our God, and they shall reign on the earth.”

[11] Then I looked, and I heard around the throne and the living creatures and the elders the voice of many angels, numbering myriads of myriads and thousands of thousands, [12] saying with a loud voice,

> “Worthy is the Lamb who was slain, to receive power and wealth and wisdom and might and honor and glory and blessing!”

[13] And I heard every creature in heaven and on earth and under the earth and in the sea, and all that is in them, saying,

> “To him who sits on the throne and to the Lamb be blessing and honor and glory and might forever and ever!”

[14] And the four living creatures said, “Amen!” and the elders fell down and worshiped.

## Holy Gospel [Jn 21:1-19 ESV]

[1] After this Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias, and he revealed himself in this way. [2] Simon Peter, Thomas (called the Twin), Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together. [3] Simon Peter said to them, “I am going fishing.” They said to him, “We will go with you.” They went out and got into the boat, but that night they caught nothing.

[4] Just as day was breaking, Jesus stood on the shore; yet the disciples did not know that it was Jesus. [5] Jesus said to them, “Children, do you have any fish?” They answered him, “No.” [6] He said to them, “Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some.” So they cast it, and now they were not able to haul it in, because of the quantity of fish. [7] That disciple whom Jesus loved therefore said to Peter, “It is the Lord!” When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he put on his outer garment, for he was stripped for work, and threw himself into the sea. [8] The other disciples came in the boat, dragging the net full of fish, for they were not far from the land, but about a hundred yards off.

[9] When they got out on land, they saw a charcoal fire in place, with fish laid out on it, and bread. [10] Jesus said to them, “Bring some of the fish that you have just caught.” [11] So Simon Peter went aboard and hauled the net ashore, full of large fish, 153 of them. And although there were so many, the net was not torn. [12] Jesus said to them, “Come and have breakfast.” Now none of the disciples dared ask him, “Who are you?” They knew it was the Lord. [13] Jesus came and took the bread and gave it to them, and so with the fish. [14] This was now the third time that Jesus was revealed to the disciples after he was raised from the dead.

[15] When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, “Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord; you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Feed my lambs.” [16] He said to him a second time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” He said to him, “Yes, Lord; you know that I love you.” He said to him, “Tend my sheep.” [17] He said to him the third time, “Simon, son of John, do you love me?” Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time, “Do you love me?” and he said to him, “Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you.” Jesus said to him, “Feed my sheep. [18] Truly, truly, I say to you, when you were young, you used to dress yourself and walk wherever you wanted, but when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will dress you and carry you where you do not want to go.” [19] (This he said to show by what kind of death he was to glorify God.) And after saying this he said to him, “Follow me.”

## Introit [Ps 145:4-7, 9; antiphon: Ps 145:10]

> All your works shall give thanks to you, | O LORD,*  
> and all your saints shall | bless you!  
> One generation shall commend your works to an- | other,*  
> and shall declare your | mighty acts.  
> On the glorious splendor of your | majesty,*  
> and on your wondrous works, I will | meditate.  
> They shall speak of the might of your | awesome deeds,*  
> and I will declare your | greatness.  
> They shall pour forth the fame of your abundant | goodness*  
> and shall sing aloud of your | righteousness.  
> The LORD is | good to all,*  
> and his mercy is over all that | he has made.  

## Collect

O God, through the humiliation of Your Son You raised up the fallen world.
Grant to Your faithful people, rescued from the peril of everlasting death, perpetual gladness and eternal joys;
through Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 209 _Who is This that Comes from Edom_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 344 _Come, Let Us Join Our Cheerful Songs_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 315 _I Come, O Savior, to Thy Table_ st 1‑5
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 205 _The Day of Resurrection_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Ac 9:6. This is inscribed on Pastor Long's gravestone: "Lord, what wilt Thou have me do?"

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
