<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<title>From the Pastor (06/2016)</title>
</head>

## From the Pastor

Cleveland finally won a championship!
I have never seen a sports victory mean so much to so many people since the USA won hockey gold in the 1980 Winter Olympics.
“Where were you when the Cavs won the championship?” will be remembered for years to come.
I pray that crime drops in our city along with the rise in goodwill created by the Cavs' victory.

But which is greater: the Cavs winning the championship or the Baptism of a child?
Which is greater: All the money of PNC and Key Bank put together or God allowing rain to fall from the sky?

Were rain never to fall from the sky, there would be no harvest, no Save‑A‑Lot, no food at all.
We would all die, of course, but before that, all economies would collapse and money held by banks would be worthless.
As we pray to our Father in heaven, “Give us this day our daily bread,” we pray also for rain, without which there is no daily bread, no human endeavor, no money, no goods and services to buy and sell.
God allowing rain to fall from the sky is far greater than all the money of all the banks in the world.

Is there an alternative to rain for giving us our daily bread? No. God has ordered our earthly life to depend on rain.
Do not be offended because rain constrains us‒God is good and certainly gives rain to everyone without our prayers, even to all evil people.
God is noble‒He provides rain for both the evil and the good.
There was a time, however, in the days of Elijah, when He withheld rain from evil people for three and a half years (James 5:17), but that was to turn their hearts from worshiping Baal.
Even then we cannot accuse God's character; for Him to take action to turn us from idolatry is to desire that we should not perish (2 Peter 3:9).
He knows we are better off starving yet clinging to Jesus than satiated and clinging to Baal.
Whether God constrains, gives, or takes away, blessed is the name of the Lord (Job 1:21)! He does everything to keep us alive and to save us from sin.

Were no child ever baptized‒the vast majority of Christians were baptized as children‒there would be little effect of the Holy Spirit in the world today, for the Holy Spirit comes by Baptism (Titus 3:5‑6; Acts 2:38).
What an insignificant thing it is in the eyes of the world: to drag a child to church and wash him with water when he does not even know what is going on.
(But the Bible says He does know (Mark 10:14‑15)!)
How many parents today neglect to have their children baptized but make sure to watch a Cavs game?
I admit my own excitement over the victory and hope that the goodwill from it is a blessing to our city.
But how much goodwill has the Holy Spirit generated by the Baptism of children?
I dare say that without the Baptism of children, the human race would have come to a violent end long ago.
No Cavs championship, even together with an Indians championship, could generate that much goodwill.
God, again, is nobly at work with water, doing everything to keep us alive and to save us from sin.
The point is that God chooses to work through those things that are despised by the world and our flesh, yet He is there doing great things for us.

The greatest of all is His death on the Cross for the life of the world (John 6:51), in which we personally participate at Holy Communion.
We are now “Christians,” little Christs, and we find that whatever we do by faith in Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him (Colossians 3:17), is a godly deed, though despised by the world.
The Bible gives us many examples.
The poor widow tithed $1.25 in today's money, but our Lord says, **“Truly, I tell you, this poor widow has put in more than all of them”** [(Luke 21:3 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%2021%3A3/).
King Hezekiah trusted in the Lord while Jerusalem was besieged by the great Assyrian army and taunted by the Rabshakeh.
The siege ended when the angel of the LORD struck down the Assyrian army of 185,000 men (2 Kings 18‑19).
And finally, David went after Goliath with faith, stones, and a sling, and was victorious (1 Samuel 17).
May God's noble work continue in us through faith in Jesus Christ. Amen.
