<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# LWML Spring Rally

## During the service

* Ram Sarran and Paul Hoffman(?) assist with Holy Communion.

## Announcements

* ZZZ

## Reading [Eph 6:10-20 ESV; sermon text]

[10] Finally, be strong in the Lord and in the strength of his might. [11] Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. [12] For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places. [13] Therefore take up the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand firm. [14] Stand therefore, having fastened on the belt of truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness, [15] and, as shoes for your feet, having put on the readiness given by the gospel of peace. [16] In all circumstances take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming darts of the evil one; [17] and take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, [18] praying at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication. To that end keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all the saints, [19] and also for me, that words may be given to me in opening my mouth boldly to proclaim the mystery of the gospel, [20] for which I am an ambassador in chains, that I may declare it boldly, as I ought to speak.

## Collect (last Sunday's collect)

Almighty God, merciful Father,
since You have wakened from death the Shepherd of Your sheep,
grant us Your Holy Spirit
that when we hear the voice of our Shepherd
we may know Him who calls us each by name
and follow where He leads;
through the same Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 444 _Rise! To Arms! With Prayer Employ You_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, *w*omen engaged in spiritual *w*arfare—that will be, in part, Pastor Ram's message to you today.
Well then, Ephesians chapter 6 is the best-known armor of God, spiritual wafare passage in the Bible:

> **Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the schemes of the devil. For we do not wrestle against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the cosmic powers over this present darkness, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly places.**

Even with Christ resurrected from the dead and Satan completely defeated for all who call on the name of Jesus, Satan has not been destroyed yet and thrown into the lake of fire [(Rv 20:10)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation+20/).
And although Satan has been completely been defeated for you, who are baptized and believe, his might seems to be gaining in the world.
*[Illustration]* Look at the spiritualists available for hire in this community.
Within a mile and half of this church, I can think of three spiritualists who will read tarot cards for you, read your palms, consult the stars, use clairvoyant powers—what have you—to let you know more about your inner life and your future.
These are the satanic arts that we are warned about in the explanation of the Second Commandment in the catechism.
One of the spiritualists, Leeza, had a storefront between Unity and St Mark.
Her storefront recently closed, and I thought, “Good! One lest practicioner of satanic arts in the neighborhood.”

Guess what? She opened a bigger place on State Road.
And our Lord Himself has warned us that the evil and deception will be greatest in the last days.
So, beloved in the Lord, be prepared for spiritual warfare.
Put on the belt of truth, the breastplate of righteousness, shoes of the readiness given by the gospel of peace, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.
The conclusion, however, is *pray*.
*Save us, Lord Jesus, from this trouble!* And He will, and glory will be given to His name, for God has promised to hear your prayers and answer them.

“What a privilege to carry everything to God in prayer.” You know that hymn well.
Well, you just sang another good hymn about clinging to God's Word and calling out to Jesus to save you in times of spiritual warfare.
Already the first verse pretty much says it all:

> *Rise! To arms! With prayer employ you.*  
> *O Christians, lest the Foe destroy you,*  
> *For Satan has designed your fall.*  
> *Wield God's Word, a weapon glorious!*  
> *Against each foe you'll be victorious;*  
> *Our God will set you o'er them all.*  
> *Is Satan strong and fell?*  
> *Here is Immanuel. Sing Hosanna!*  
> *The strong ones yield,*  
> *With Christ our Shield,*  
> *And we as conqu'rors hold the field.*

The word *fell*, by the way, means *destructive* or *deadly*.

> *Is Satan strong and fell?*  
> *Here is Immanuel. Sing Hosanna!*

Save us, Lord Jesus! AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes


ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
