<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 1st Sunday in Lent

## During the service

* For sermon hymn, announce which stanzas we are singing.

## Announcements

* Mike Wiemels will be received as a communicant member today.
* “The Ten Commandments” Bible study and movie Wednesdays 4:30‑6; soup supper 6‑7; service at 7.
* If you are following religious liberty cases, especially following last summer's Supreme Court decision, KFUO, the broadcaster of the LCMS, will have a lawyer, who is knowledgable about religious liberty cases, as a guest 3:30 pm on Wed, Feb 17. KFUO broadcasts on the Internet at [<kbd>kfuo.org</kbd>](http://www.kfuoam.org/).
* Please be careful in this cold weather!
* Happy Valentine's Day

## Old Testament [Dt 26:1‑11 ESV]

[1] “When you come into the land that the LORD your God is giving you for an inheritance and have taken possession of it and live in it, [2] you shall take some of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which you harvest from your land that the LORD your God is giving you, and you shall put it in a basket, and you shall go to the place that the LORD your God will choose, to make his name to dwell there. [3] And you shall go to the priest who is in office at that time and say to him, ‘I declare today to the LORD your God that I have come into the land that the LORD swore to our fathers to give us.’ [4] Then the priest shall take the basket from your hand and set it down before the altar of the LORD your God.

[5] “And you shall make response before the LORD your God, ‘A wandering Aramean was my father. And he went down into Egypt and sojourned there, few in number, and there he became a nation, great, mighty, and populous. [6] And the Egyptians treated us harshly and humiliated us and laid on us hard labor. [7] Then we cried to the LORD, the God of our fathers, and the LORD heard our voice and saw our affliction, our toil, and our oppression. [8] And the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, with great deeds of terror, with signs and wonders. [9] And he brought us into this place and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey. [10] And behold, now I bring the first of the fruit of the ground, which you, O LORD, have given me.’ And you shall set it down before the LORD your God and worship before the LORD your God. [11] And you shall rejoice in all the good that the LORD your God has given to you and to your house, you, and the Levite, and the sojourner who is among you.”

## Epistle [Rm 10:8b‑13 ESV; sermon text]

[8b] “The word is near you, in your mouth and in your heart” (that is, the word of faith that we proclaim); [9] because, if you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. [10] For with the heart one believes and is justified, and with the mouth one confesses and is saved. [11] For the Scripture says, “Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame.” [12] For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; for the same Lord is Lord of all, bestowing his riches on all who call on him. [13] For “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”

## Holy Gospel [Lk 4:1‑13 ESV]

[1] And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan and was led by the Spirit in the wilderness [2] for forty days, being tempted by the devil. And he ate nothing during those days. And when they were ended, he was hungry. [3] The devil said to him, “If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread.” [4] And Jesus answered him, “It is written, ‘Man shall not live by bread alone.’” [5] And the devil took him up and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time, [6] and said to him, “To you I will give all this authority and their glory, for it has been delivered to me, and I give it to whom I will. [7] If you, then, will worship me, it will all be yours.” [8] And Jesus answered him, “It is written,

> “‘You shall worship the Lord your God, and him only shall you serve.’”

[9] And he took him to Jerusalem and set him on the pinnacle of the temple and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down from here, [10] for it is written,

> “‘He will command his angels concerning you, to guard you,’

[11] and

> “‘On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone.’”

[12] And Jesus answered him, “It is said, ‘You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.’” [13] And when the devil had ended every temptation, he departed from him until an opportune time.

## Introit [Ps 91:9‑13; antiphon: Ps 91:15‑16]

> When he calls to me, I will answer him; I will be with him in | trouble;*  
> I will rescue him and | honor him.  
> With long life I will sat- | isfy him*  
> and show him my sal- vation.  
> Because you have made the LORD your | dwelling place—*  
> the Most High, who is my | refuge—  
> no evil shall be allowed to be- | fall you,*  
> no plague come | near your tent.  
> For he will command his angels con- | cerning you*  
> to guard you in | all your ways.  
> On their hands they will | bear you up,*  
> lest you strike your foot a- | gainst a stone.  
> You will tread on the lion and the | adder;*  
> the young lion and the serpent you will trample | underfoot.

## Collect

O Lord God, You led Your ancient people through the wilderness and brought them to the promised land. Guide the people of Your Church that following our Savior we may walk through the wilderness of this world toward the glory of the world to come; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 151 _Christ, the Life of All the Living_ st 1‑4
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 373 _By Grace I'm Saved, Grace Free and Boundless_ st 1‑3, 6‑7
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 315 _I come, O Savior, to Thy Table_ st 6‑10
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 151 _Christ, the Life of All the Living_ st 5‑7

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, I have said this before and I'll say it again.
If I were to add a stained glass window to our sanctuary, it would be
Satan tempting Jesus in the wilderness, which is the Holy Gospel for today.
Christ's temptation was at the beginning of His public minstry,
_[Point to windows]_ and so, in the scheme of our stained glass windows, it would fit chronologically
between the boy Jesus in the temple window and the Sermon on the Mount window
there on the lectern side of the sanctuary.
However, the Bible tells us that Christ was led by the Holy Spirit to the wilderness to be tempted by Satan _right after His Baptism_
_[Point to Baptism window]_.
And so, here on the pulpit side of the sanctuary, I would put the temptation window next to the Baptism window;
maybe even design it like the Baptism window—Jesus being tempted by Satan
in the left pane and you being tempted by Satan—to gossip, or to indulge your flesh—in the right pane of the temptation window.
May we all believe and hold dear that Jesus, true Man, sharing our weak human flesh,
was tempted by Satan, yet without sin [(Heb 4:15)](http://www.esvbible.org/Hebrews+4:15/).
By your Baptism, you too are given the same Holy Spirit [(Ac 2:38)](http://www.esvbible.org/Acts%202%3A38/) by whom you are able to endure temptation
and escape from it [(1Co 10:13)](http://www.esvbible.org/1%20Corinthians%2010%3A13/).
By the Holy Spirit, you too are reminded that Satan, although he appears to be powerful, is already judged [(Jn 16:8‑11)](http://www.esvbible.org/John%2016%3A8-11/)
and in the end he will be thrown into the lake of fire together with the beast and the false prophet [(Rv 20:10)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation+20:10/).
Take courage from what God has revealed to you in the Bible.

But what if Jesus had caved in to Satan's temptation and turned a stone into bread?
Give our Lord a break—the Man had not eaten in forty days!
I think _I_ would have turned the stone to bread and eaten it, if I could.
Jesus may have been emaciated by His 40‑day hunger.
But then again, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, He might have had a little
pre‑Transfiguration glow and not looked so bad.
But if He had turned a stone into bread and eaten it—how could I blame Him?—I think it is fair to say
that _it would have been a shame_—to see Satan tell Jesus what to do.
Even if just for a moment, Satan would have been calling the shots; Jesus would have been Satan's slave; and that would have been a shame.

You have to admit, though, that Satan had told our Lord to do something that made sense: it makes sense that a hungry man eat bread.

Jesus appealed to **“It is written.”**
At this point, it pays to be stubborn.
You may fall into sin for being stubborn and ornery.
As a child, you may be stubborn and ornery and not listen to your parents.
As an adult, you may be stubborn and ornery and not listen to your boss.
But as Christian,
_be_ stubborn and ornery and do not listen to the devil!
This is good and holy: Do not listen to the devil and _cling to God's Word!_

In our sermon hymn, we sang,

> _Why stagger at this word of promise?_  
> _Hath Scripture ever falsehood taught?_  
> _Nay; then this word must true remain:_  
> _By grace thou, too, shalt heav'n obtain._

_Grace_ means _gift_.

AMEN.

## Outline

<center>EVERYONE WHO BELIEVES IN HIM WILL NOT BE PUT TO SHAME.</center>

1. Temptation stained glass window
1. What if Jesus had turned a stone into bread?
    1. It would have been a shame.
    1. Jesus would have been Satan's slave.
    1. Remember the Israelite slavery in Egypt.
        1. Jesus survived Satan's temptation by properly interpreting God's Word.
        1. Clinging to God's Word is to honor His name.
1. and be saved from shame.
    1. “And the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, with great deeds of terror, with signs and wonders” (Dt 26:8).
    1. God's arm to save is outstretched when Jesus is tempted at the wilderness.
    1. God's arm to save is outstretched at the Cross.

## Notes

Dt 26:5‑10. The confession of Israelite faith to be confessed at the presentation of the firstfruits:

> **A wandering Aramean was my father.**  
> **And he went down into Egypt and sojourned there, few in number,**  
> **and there he became a nation, great, mighty, and populous.**  
> **And the Egyptians treated us harshly and humiliated us and laid on us hard labor.**  
> **Then we cried to the LORD, the God of our fathers,**  
> **and the LORD heard our voice and saw our affliction, our toil, and our oppression.**  
> **And the LORD brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm,**  
> **with great deeds of terror, with signs and wonders.**  
> **And he brought us into this place and gave us this land,**  
> **a land flowing with milk and honey.**  
> **And behold, now I bring the first of the fruit of the ground, which you, O LORD, have given me.**

This is the type of slavery to Satan.
Our rebirth in Christ redeems us from Satan's hard oppression.

Dt 26:8. This verse is repeated throughout the Bible in variouis ways.

Dt 26:10. Giving firstfruits back to God honors Him.

Rm 8:9‑10. “Jesus is Lord” is the simplest confession of faith. We also regularly use longer creeds: the Apostles', Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds. These creeds, and faith in them, bring with them the promise of salvation.

Lk 4:6. That is a presumptuous thing to say.

Lk 4:13. The devil lurks until he can tempt you again.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
