<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 9th after Pentecost

## Checklist

<table>
<tr>
<th>To do</th><th>Who will do it?</th><th>Is it done?</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ZZZ</td><td>ZZZ</td><td></td>
</tr>
</table>

## During the service

* Do not practice Matins today: there may be too much going on.
* VBS children sing during offering.

## Announcements

* VBS was well-attended. (Check with Virginia Aroson for final attendance count.) Half of the children were brought here by Ken Sundermeier.
Thank you to everyone to made donations or volunteered!
* Our children will sing the VBS song during the offering.

## Old Testament [Gn 18:1-14 ESV]

[1] And the LORD appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat at the door of his tent in the heat of the day. [2] He lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold, three men were standing in front of him. When he saw them, he ran from the tent door to meet them and bowed himself to the earth [3] and said, “O Lord, if I have found favor in your sight, do not pass by your servant. [4] Let a little water be brought, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree, [5] while I bring a morsel of bread, that you may refresh yourselves, and after that you may pass on—since you have come to your servant.” So they said, “Do as you have said.” [6] And Abraham went quickly into the tent to Sarah and said, “Quick! Three seahs of fine flour! Knead it, and make cakes.” [7] And Abraham ran to the herd and took a calf, tender and good, and gave it to a young man, who prepared it quickly. [8] Then he took curds and milk and the calf that he had prepared, and set it before them. And he stood by them under the tree while they ate.

[9] They said to him, “Where is Sarah your wife?” And he said, “She is in the tent.” [10] The LORD said, “I will surely return to you about this time next year, and Sarah your wife shall have a son.” And Sarah was listening at the tent door behind him. [11] Now Abraham and Sarah were old, advanced in years. The way of women had ceased to be with Sarah. [12] So Sarah laughed to herself, saying, “After I am worn out, and my lord is old, shall I have pleasure?” [13] The LORD said to Abraham, “Why did Sarah laugh and say, ‘Shall I indeed bear a child, now that I am old?’ [14] Is anything too hard for the LORD? At the appointed time I will return to you, about this time next year, and Sarah shall have a son.”

## Epistle [Col 1:21-29 ESV; sermon text]

[21] And you, who once were alienated and hostile in mind, doing evil deeds, [22] he has now reconciled in his body of flesh by his death, in order to present you holy and blameless and above reproach before him, [23] if indeed you continue in the faith, stable and steadfast, not shifting from the hope of the gospel that you heard, which has been proclaimed in all creation under heaven, and of which I, Paul, became a minister.

[24] Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and in my flesh I am filling up what is lacking in Christ's afflictions for the sake of his body, that is, the church, [25] of which I became a minister according to the stewardship from God that was given to me for you, to make the word of God fully known, [26] the mystery hidden for ages and generations but now revealed to his saints. [27] To them God chose to make known how great among the Gentiles are the riches of the glory of this mystery, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. [28] Him we proclaim, warning everyone and teaching everyone with all wisdom, that we may present everyone mature in Christ. [29] For this I toil, struggling with all his energy that he powerfully works within me.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 10:38-42 ESV]

[38] Now as they went on their way, Jesus entered a village. And a woman named Martha welcomed him into her house. [39] And she had a sister called Mary, who sat at the Lord's feet and listened to his teaching. [40] But Martha was distracted with much serving. And she went up to him and said, “Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her then to help me.” [41] But the Lord answered her, “Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things, [42] but one thing is necessary. Mary has chosen the good portion, which will not be taken away from her.”

## Introit [Ps 119:57-60, 64; antiphon: Ps 119:105]

> Your word is a lamp | to my feet*  
> and a light | to my path.  
> The LORD is my | portion;*  
> I promise to | keep your words.  
> I entreat your favor with | all my heart;*  
> be gracious to me according to your | promise.  
> When I think | on my ways,*  
> I turn my feet to your testi- | monies;  
> I hasten and do | not delay*  
> to keep your com- | mandments.  
> The earth, O LORD, is full of your | steadfast love;*  
> teach me your | statutes!

## Collect

O Lord, grant us the Spirit to hear Your Word and know the one thing needful that by Your Word and Spirit we may live according to Your will;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 10 _This is the Day the Lord Hath Made_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 354 _In the Cross of Christ I Glory_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 366 _One Thing's Needful; Lord, This Treasure_ st 1-4, 7

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, our Epistle reading this morning continues in St&nbsp;Paul's letter to the Colossians. Between last week's reading and this week's reading, there is a hymn to Jesus that is important to hear:

> **[The Son] is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation. For by him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or dominions or rulers or authorities—all things were created through him and for him. And he is before all things, and in him all things hold together. And he is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in everything he might be preeminent. For in him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell, and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross.** [(Col&nbsp;1:15&#x2011;20 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Colossians%201%3A15-20/)

You see, Paul is writing to the Colossians to refute false teachers who have gained influence over the Colossians.
This hymn to Jesus establishes the apostolic faith against the false teachers.

> **[The Son] is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.**

Jesus is the visible image of the invisible God.
Have you ever wondered about the Trinity? Look at Jesus.
Do you want to understand who God is and what He does? Look at Jesus.
Have you ever wanted to know &hellip; wanted to know _anything_ about God? Look at Jesus&mdash;if you have seen Him you have seen God.

He is also **the firstborn of all creation**.
Beloved, beware that the Jehovah's Witnesses jump on this verse and say,
&ldquo;Look, Jesus is not God&mdash;He is a creature.&rdquo;
The heretic Arius falsely taught that, according to this verse, Jesus is the first of many creatures.
Yet **by Him all things were created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible**.
St Athanasius refuted Arius saying, &ldquo;No, the _firstborn_ is not _part_ of the creation, but the _cause of it_!&rdquo;<sup>[<a name="id0001" href="#ftn.id0001">§</a>]</sup>
We _do_ confess that Jesus is the only-begotten Son of the Father, yet, as Jesus says,
**&ldquo;Whoever has seen me has seen the Father&rdquo;** [(Jn&nbsp;14:9 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/John+14:9/).
Jesus and the Holy Spirit are one God along with the Father&mdash;one creator God.
(You see, these verses, verses 15&#x2011;20, are important verses!)

Jesus not only holds creation together, He holds His Church together.
Beloved in the Lord, when you are awestruck by nature's power and beauty and want to praise God for it,
do not forget that He is no less concerned and no less at work in _you_, His Church.
You, beloved in the Lord, His weak and feeble Church, are none other than His _new_ creation, created by the forgivess of sins and the pouring out of the Holy Spirit in your hearts.
The world is dying, but you are being made new every day&mdash;you are salt and light in this dying world, **created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that [you] should walk in them** [(Eph&nbsp;2:10 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ephesians%202%3A10/).

> **And you, who once were alienated and hostile in mind, doing evil deeds, he has now reconciled in his body of flesh by his death, in order to present you holy and blameless and above reproach before him.**

You are now Christ's holy, blameless Church, but never forget who you once were: **alienated and hostile in mind, doing evil deeds**.
Do you want to return to who you once were, doing evil deeds? _I don't!_

> **If you, O LORD, should mark iniquities,**  
> **O Lord, who could stand?**  
> **But with you there is forgiveness,**  
> **that you may be feared.** [(Ps&nbsp;130:3&#x2011;4 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Psalm%20130%3A3-4/)

Beloved in the Lord, remember that outside of forgiveness in Christ's name, God is just to count your sins and mark your iniquities against you. I fear God knowing that He would be right to condemn me by my actions.
_But in Christ, my actions are no longer counted against me! In Christ, you are no longer in your iniquities! You have repented of your sins! Flee from them and run to Christ!_

Beloved in the Lord, as you believe in Christ and flee from sin, expect suffering and mockery in this world.
The devil is the prince of this world; he is **the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience** [(Eph&nbsp;2:2)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ephesians+2:2/).
Take your beating from the world; you are not weak, you are strong with Jesus.
What you suffer will serve to build up His Church and make known the riches of the glory of Christ. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Gn 18:12. “Shall I have the pleasure of finally having my own child?”

Gn 18:14. **Is anything too hard for the LORD?**

Col 1:10. _Increasing in the knowledge of God_‒this theme will continue.

Col 1:13‑14. Classic verse: **He has delivered us from the domain of darkness and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved Son, in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.**

Col 1:15‑20. **[15] ὅς ἐστιν εἰκὼν τοῦ θεοῦ τοῦ ἀοράτου, πρωτότοκος πάσης κτίσεως, [16] ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ ἐκτίσθη τὰ πάντα ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς καὶ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς, τὰ ὁρατὰ καὶ τὰ ἀόρατα, εἴτε θρόνοι εἴτε κυριότητες εἴτε ἀρχαὶ εἴτε ἐξουσίαι: τὰ πάντα δι' αὐτοῦ καὶ εἰς αὐτὸν ἔκτισται, [17] καὶ αὐτός ἐστιν πρὸ πάντων καὶ τὰ πάντα ἐν αὐτῷ συνέστηκεν. [18] καὶ αὐτός ἐστιν ἡ κεφαλὴ τοῦ σώματος, τῆς ἐκκλησίας: ὅς ἐστιν ἀρχή, πρωτότοκος ἐκ τῶν νεκρῶν, ἵνα γένηται ἐν πᾶσιν αὐτὸς πρωτεύων, [19] ὅτι ἐν αὐτῷ εὐδόκησεν πᾶν τὸ πλήρωμα κατοικῆσαι [20] καὶ δι' αὐτοῦ ἀποκαταλλάξαι τὰ πάντα εἰς αὐτόν, εἰρηνοποιήσας διὰ τοῦ αἵματος τοῦ σταυροῦ αὐτοῦ, [δι' αὐτοῦ] εἴτε τὰ ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς εἴτε τὰ ἐν τοῖς οὐρανοῖς.**

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0001" href="#id0001">§</a>]</sup>
Footnote in _LSB Study Bible_ for Col 1:15
