<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 3rd Sunday in Lent

## During the service  

## Announcements

* Please pray for Verna Steinbrenner: she at the Cleveland Clinic being treated for pain.
* Lou Ferencik went to sleep in Jesus Thursday at 2 p.m. Visitation is on Tuesday March 1 at 4-8pm at Busch Funeral Home, 7501 Ridge Road, Parma. Funeral is on Wednesday March 2 at 10am at Busch Funeral Home, 7501 Ridge Road, Parma. Interment at Brooklyn Heights Cemetery.
* Joseph Martovitz Jr., son of Joe Martovitz (Laura's husband), went to sleep in Jesus Wednesday. Visitation on Monday 2-4pm, 6-8pm at Waite Funeral Home. Funeral Tuesday at 10 am at Waite. He was 35 years old.
* “The Ten Commandments” Bible study and movie Wednesdays 4:30‑6; soup supper 6‑7; service at 7 (sermon on the Lord's Prayer).
* Next Sunday is communion Sunday again! In March Communion will be first and third Sundays.
* Today is Voters Assembly in dining hall after the service. Please attend. Luncheon served following meeting.
* We had an accident during youth activities last night and a pane of glass broke in the door leading from the dining room to the stairway.

## Old Testament [Ezekiel 33:7-20 ESV]

[7] “So you, son of man, I have made a watchman for the house of Israel. Whenever you hear a word from my mouth, you shall give them warning from me. [8] If I say to the wicked, O wicked one, you shall surely die, and you do not speak to warn the wicked to turn from his way, that wicked person shall die in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at your hand. [9] But if you warn the wicked to turn from his way, and he does not turn from his way, that person shall die in his iniquity, but you will have delivered your soul.

[10] “And you, son of man, say to the house of Israel, Thus have you said: ‘Surely our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and we rot away because of them. How then can we live?’ [11] Say to them, As I live, declares the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn back, turn back from your evil ways, for why will you die, O house of Israel?

[12] “And you, son of man, say to your people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him when he transgresses, and as for the wickedness of the wicked, he shall not fall by it when he turns from his wickedness, and the righteous shall not be able to live by his righteousness when he sins. [13] Though I say to the righteous that he shall surely live, yet if he trusts in his righteousness and does injustice, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered, but in his injustice that he has done he shall die. [14] Again, though I say to the wicked, ‘You shall surely die,’ yet if he turns from his sin and does what is just and right, [15] if the wicked restores the pledge, gives back what he has taken by robbery, and walks in the statutes of life, not doing injustice, he shall surely live; he shall not die. [16] None of the sins that he has committed shall be remembered against him. He has done what is just and right; he shall surely live.

[17] “Yet your people say, ‘The way of the Lord is not just,’ when it is their own way that is not just. [18] When the righteous turns from his righteousness and does injustice, he shall die for it. [19] And when the wicked turns from his wickedness and does what is just and right, he shall live by this. [20] Yet you say, ‘The way of the Lord is not just.’ O house of Israel, I will judge each of you according to his ways.”

## Epistle [1 Cor. 10:1-13 ESV; sermon text]

[1] For I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, [2] and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, [3] and all ate the same spiritual food, [4] and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they drank from the spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ. [5] Nevertheless, with most of them God was not pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness.

[6] Now these things took place as examples for us, that we might not desire evil as they did. [7] Do not be idolaters as some of them were; as it is written, “The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play.” [8] We must not indulge in sexual immorality as some of them did, and twenty-three thousand fell in a single day. [9] We must not put Christ to the test, as some of them did and were destroyed by serpents, [10] nor grumble, as some of them did and were destroyed by the Destroyer. [11] Now these things happened to them as an example, but they were written down for our instruction, on whom the end of the ages has come. [12] Therefore let anyone who thinks that he stands take heed lest he fall. [13] No temptation has overtaken you that is not common to man. God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond your ability, but with the temptation he will also provide the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 13:1-9 ESV]

[1] There were some present at that very time who told him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. [2] And he answered them, “Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered in this way? [3] No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish. [4] Or those eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them: do you think that they were worse offenders than all the others who lived in Jerusalem? [5] No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish.”

[6] And he told this parable: “A man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it and found none. [7] And he said to the vinedresser, ‘Look, for three years now I have come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and I find none. Cut it down. Why should it use up the ground?’ [8] And he answered him, ‘Sir, let it alone this year also, until I dig around it and put on manure. [9] Then if it should bear fruit next year, well and good; but if not, you can cut it down.’”

## Introit [Ps 5:4-8; antiphon: Ps 1:6]

> For the LORD knows the way of the | righteous,*  
> but the way of the wicked will | perish.  
> For you are not a God who delights in | wickedness;*  
> evil may not | dwell with you.  
> The boastful shall not stand be- | fore your eyes;*  
> you hate all evil- | doers.  
> You destroy those | who speak lies;*  
> the LORD abhors the bloodthirsty and de- | ceitful man.  
> But I, through the abundance of your steadfast love, will en- | ter your house.*  
> I will bow down toward your holy temple in the | fear of you.  
> Lead me, O LORD, in your righteousness because of my | enemies;*  
> make your way straight be- | fore me.  

## Collect

O God, whose glory it is always to have mercy, be gracious to all who have gone astray from Your ways and bring them again with penitent hearts and steadfast faith to embrace and hold fast the unchangeable truth of Your Word; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 376 _Rock of Ages, Cleft for Me_
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 326 _Lord, to Thee I Make Confession_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 149 _Come to Calvary's Holy Mountain_
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 156 _Not all the Blood of Beasts_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, we are now right in the middle of the season of Lent.
It seems like Ash Wednesday was a long time ago and Good Friday is just around the corner.
Easter is in March this year.
Well guess what? March starts on Tuesday!
And it is certainly true for many that we are surprised when a day we thought
to be way in the future comes upon us quickly.
But help us, dear Lord Jesus: let not our unrepented sins come upon us quickly!
From our Old Testament reading in Ezekiel, chapter 33:

> **Surely our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and we rot away because of them. How then can we live?** [(Ezk 33:10)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ezekiel%2033%3A10/)

Our lives are in danger from unrepented sin.
Death and decay—that is what our sins have brought upon us, and it comes on us quickly.
If you have ever seen death and decay, you do not need me to tell you about it.
Our own Lou Ferencik, who left this valley of sorrow this week to be with the Lord,
was a veteran of the Korean War.
You do not need to tell Lou about death and decay;
he would be the first to tell you, “It's no fun.”
_Who will be the watchman_ to sound the warning about the death and decay that our transgressions and sins have brought upon us?

God raised up the Old Testament prophets to be the watchmen. God raised up Ezekiel:

> **“So you, son of man, I have made a watchman for the house of Israel. Whenever you hear a word from my mouth, you shall give them warning from me. If I say to the wicked, O wicked one, you shall surely die, and you do not speak to warn the wicked to turn from his way, that wicked person shall die in his iniquity, but his blood I will require at your hand.”** [(Ezk 33:7‑8)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ezekiel%2033%3A7-8/)

This is serious business.
If God has called you to be the watchman, _you are responsible to warn the wicked_.
If you do not, they die and you are punished for negligence.
This is serious business that the God's Law be proclaimed that sinners everywhere may fear the punishment of their sin and repent … _repent_ of their wickedness so that they may be healed by the Holy Spirit through the proclamation of the Gospel: _the forgiveness of sins in the name of Jesus Christ!_

This forgivness is not from a far-away, long-ago Jesus.
Jesus is here _now_ and He is closer than you think.
If you have unrepented sins, you should be afraid because they will jump on you faster than you think. But **“as I live, declares the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live; turn back, turn back from your evil ways, for why will you die, O house of Israel?”** [(Ezk 33:11)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ezekiel%2033%3A11/)
As serious as God is about punishing sin, what He really wants is that **the wicked turn from his way and live**. And what is revealed to us in the Bible is that though your sin is closing in on you, _Jesus is closer than you think_.

When you read the Old Testament—and now let us turn our attention to the Israelites who wandered in the wilderness with Moses—when you read the Old Testament, you may ask yourself, “Where is Jesus?”
The Israelites are in despair at the Red Sea because they see Pharaoh's army coming,
and Moses says, **“The LORD will fight for you, and you have only to be silent”** [(Ex 14:14 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Exodus%2014%3A14/).


> **Then the angel of God who was going before the host of Israel moved and went behind them, and the pillar of cloud moved from before them and stood behind them, coming between the host of Egypt and the host of Israel. And there was the cloud and the darkness. And it lit up the night without one coming near the other all night.** [(Ex 14:19‑20 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Exodus%2014%3A19-20/)

Now I had asked the question, “Where is Jesus?” _Jesus is there_, as is written in our Epistle lesson in 1 Corinthians, chapter 10:

> **For I do not want you to be unaware, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and all ate the same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they drank from the spiritual Rock that followed them, _and the Rock was Christ_.**

Jesus is the spiritual rock who _followed the Israelites in the wilderness_.
That is how close Jesus is: He is following you.
Some have put two and two together to say that the angel of the LORD who is the pillar of cloud that kept Pharaoh's army from hurting God's chosen people—this pillar of cloud and fire is none other than Christ Himself.
That is probably true, but what is _definitely_ true is that Jesus was with the Israelites the whole time through all their trials.
_Jesus was right there_.

Beloved in the Lord, Jesus is much closer than you think.
He is there in your heart.
He has given you a church home and fellow Christians with whom to associate.
He has called a pastor to know you by name and keep an eye on you.
He comes to you in His body and blood in Holy Communion.
He is there when two or three are gathered in His name.
He is closer to you than the sins that threaten to take your life.
AMEN.

## Outline



## Notes


## Footnotes


