<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
th { text-align: center; font-weight: bold; vertical-align: baseline; border: 3px solid blue; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 10px; }
.h { visibility: hidden; }
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 7th Sunday of Easter

## During the service

* Aadu is the reader

## Announcements

* Happy Mother's Day!
* Marilin Saluveer Baptism next week

## First Reading [Ac 1:12-26 ESV]

[12] Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away. [13] And when they had entered, they went up to the upper room, where they were staying, Peter and John and James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus and Simon the Zealot and Judas the son of James. [14] All these with one accord were devoting themselves to prayer, together with the women and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers.

[15] In those days Peter stood up among the brothers (the company of persons was in all about 120) and said, [16] “Brothers, the Scripture had to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke beforehand by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus. [17] For he was numbered among us and was allotted his share in this ministry.” [18] (Now this man acquired a field with the reward of his wickedness, and falling headlong he burst open in the middle and all his bowels gushed out. [19] And it became known to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their own language Akeldama, that is, Field of Blood.) [20] “For it is written in the Book of Psalms,

> “‘May his camp become desolate, and let there be no one to dwell in it’;

and

> “‘Let another take his office.’

[21] So one of the men who have accompanied us during all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, [22] beginning from the baptism of John until the day when he was taken up from us—one of these men must become with us a witness to his resurrection.” [23] And they put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was also called Justus, and Matthias. [24] And they prayed and said, “You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, show which one of these two you have chosen [25] to take the place in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas turned aside to go to his own place.” [26] And they cast lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.


## Epistle [Rv 22:1-6(7-11)12-20 ESV; sermon text]

[1] Then the angel showed me the river of the water of life, bright as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb [2] through the middle of the street of the city; also, on either side of the river, the tree of life with its twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. [3] No longer will there be anything accursed, but the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his servants will worship him. [4] They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. [5] And night will be no more. They will need no light of lamp or sun, for the Lord God will be their light, and they will reign forever and ever.

[6] And he said to me, “These words are trustworthy and true. And the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, has sent his angel to show his servants what must soon take place.”

[7] “And behold, I am coming soon. Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.”

[8] I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. And when I heard and saw them, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel who showed them to me, [9] but he said to me, “You must not do that! I am a fellow servant with you and your brothers the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God.”

[10] And he said to me, “Do not seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near. [11] Let the evildoer still do evil, and the filthy still be filthy, and the righteous still do right, and the holy still be holy.”

[12] “Behold, I am coming soon, bringing my recompense with me, to repay each one for what he has done. [13] I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.”

[14] Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of 
life and that they may enter the city by the gates. [15] Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.

[16] “I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify to you about these things for the churches. I am the root and the descendant of David, the bright morning star.”

[17] The Spirit and the Bride say, “Come.” And let the one who hears say, “Come.” And let the one who is thirsty come; let the one who desires take the water of life without price.

[18] I warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues described in this book, [19] and if anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book.

[20] He who testifies to these things says, “Surely I am coming soon.” Amen. Come, Lord Jesus!

## Holy Gospel [Jn 17:20-26 ESV]

[20] “I do not ask for these only, but also for those who will believe in me through their word, [21] that they may all be one, just as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that you have sent me. [22] The glory that you have given me I have given to them, that they may be one even as we are one, [23] I in them and you in me, that they may become perfectly one, so that the world may know that you sent me and loved them even as you loved me. [24] Father, I desire that they also, whom you have given me, may be with me where I am, to see my glory that you have given me because you loved me before the foundation of the world. [25] O righteous Father, even though the world does not know you, I know you, and these know that you have sent me. [26] I made known to them your name, and I will continue to make it known, that the love with which you have loved me may be in them, and I in them.”


## Introit [Ps 61:3, 5-8; antiphon: Ps 61:1]

> Hear my cry, | O God,*  
> listen | to my prayer;  
> for you have been my | refuge,*  
> a strong tower against the | enemy.  
> For you, O God, have | heard my vows;*  
> you have given me the heritage of those who | fear your name.  
> Prolong the life | of the king;*  
> may his years endure to all gener- | ations!  
> May he be enthroned forever be- | fore God;*  
> appoint steadfast love and faithfulness to watch | over him!  
> So will I ever sing praises | to your name,*  
> as I perform my vows day | after day.  

## Collect

O King of glory, Lord of hosts,
uplifted in triumph far above all heavens,
leave us not without consolation
but send us the Spirit of truth whom You promised from the Father;
for You live and reign with Him and the Holy Spirit,
one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 212 _A Hymn of Glory Let Us Sing_ st 1-4
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 343 _How Lovely Shines the Morning Star_ st 1-3, 6, 7
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 315 _I Come, O Savior, to Thy Table_ st 11-15
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 341 _Crown Him with Many Crowns_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, in case you were wondering when Jesus will return to judge the living and the dead,
here is your answer in our Epistle reading from Revelation, chapter 22:
**“Behold, I am coming _soon_.”**
This is the best information you have: Jesus is coming _soon_, so be ready.

In our Epistle reading in Revelation, chapter 21, He says it three times.
The first time, He says,

> **“Behold, I am coming soon. Blessed is the one who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.”**

And so, beloved in the Lord, you are blessed to pay attention to the book of Revelation while you are waiting and watching for Christ's return; He is coming soon.
It is my goal for you as your pastor that you keep the words of this prophecy and be *blessed*—that you keep the words of the prophecy of this book and be citizens of the holy city where the Lord God will be your light.

We have come to the end of the book of Revelation—the end of the Bible—I will not be preaching on Revelation next week—but when it comes to being blessed by keeping the words of this prophecy, here is the summary: **“Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and that they may enter the city by the gates.”**
You will enter the holy city by the gates as surely as you have washed your robes in the blood of Jesus.
Confess your stains—confess your sins to God—and wash them in the blood of Jesus—believe that His holy, precious blood shed for you on the Cross washes away your sin.
You may remember from Revelation, chapter 5 the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders proclaiming,

> **“Worthy are you[, Jesus,] to take the scroll and to open its seals, for you were slain, and by your blood you ransomed people for God from every tribe and language and people and nation.”** [(Rv 5:9 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation+5:9/)

And remember from Revelation, chapter 7 what one of the elders said about the great multitude **that no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands** [(Rv 7:9 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation%207%3A9/):


> **“These are the ones coming out of the great tribulation. They have _washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb_.”** [(Rv 7:14 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Revelation+7:14/)

*[Point to Crucifixion window]* The blood of Jesus, shed on the Cross—the blood of Jesus, which with water poured out of His side when the soldier pierced Him with a spear [(Jn 19:34)](http://www.esvbible.org/John+19:34/)—this blood was poured out for the forgiveness of your sins and is *the* guarantee that your sins are washed away in your Baptism—blood and water—your robes are clean by the blood of Jesus.

The second time Jesus says, **“Behold, I am coming soon, bringing my recompense with me, to repay each one for what he has done.”** Immediately, you ask yourself, “What have I done for which I will be repaid when Christ returns?”
Beloved in the Lord, with your robes washed clean in the blood of Jesus, ask yourself, “What have I done by faith in the blood of Jesus?”
And you will find that you have had mercy just as your Father has been merciful to you.
You will find that you have loved your enemies and done good and lent, expecting nothing in return.
You will find by your good works that you are sons of the Most High [(Lk 6:35‑36)](http://www.esvbible.org/Luke%206%3A35-36/).
Not that your good works save you, but they are a record of what you believe—you believe in the blood of Jesus, given and shed for you for the forgiveness of sins.
Your reward is to enter the city by the gates.

But God forbid that you have kept any idols while professing to be Christian.
I will share with you just one Old Testament example of God's judgment of idolatry.
Ezekiel, chapter 7:

> **“And my eye will not spare, nor will I have pity. I will punish you according to your ways, _while your abominations are in your midst_. Then you will know that I am the LORD, who strikes.”** [(Ezk 7:9 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Ezekiel%207%3A9/)

Throw your idols out of your midst—confess your sins and repent of the quickly, for the Lord is coming soon.

> **I warn everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if anyone adds to them, God will add to him the plagues described in this book, and if anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book.**

I would say this of the entire Bible: With your robes washed clean in the blood of Jesus, pay close attention to the Bible that you might not be deceived.
Do not tinker with God's revealed Word and make it to be man's word,
for doing so will close for you the gates of heaven.

**“Surely I am coming soon.” … Come, Lord Jesus!** AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

1. ZZZ
1. YYY
    1. XXX

## Notes

Ac 1:25. Judas went to hell.

Rv 22:3. No sin in heaven.

Rv 22:12. You will be repaid either for what you have done our for what Jesus has done.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
