<head>
<meta charset="utf-8">
<style>
</style>
<title>sermon</title>
</head>

# 4th Sunday in Lent

## During the service

* Trevon is acolyte.

## Announcements

* We will switch to daylight savings time a week from today.
Setting your clock ahead one hour means that you will lose one hour of sleep.
* “The Ten Commandments” Bible study and movie Wednesdays 4:30‑6; soup supper 6‑7; service at 7.

## Old Testament [Is 12:1‑6 ESV]

[1] You will say in that day:

> “I will give thanks to you, O LORD,  
> for though you were angry with me,  
> your anger turned away,  
> that you might comfort me.
	
> [2] “Behold, God is my salvation;  
> I will trust, and will not be afraid;  
> for the LORD GOD is my strength and my song,  
> and he has become my salvation.”

[3] With joy you will draw water from the wells of salvation. [4] And you will say in that day:

> “Give thanks to the LORD,  
> call upon his name,  
> make known his deeds among the peoples,  
> proclaim that his name is exalted.
	
> [5] “Sing praises to the LORD, for he has done gloriously;  
> let this be made known in all the earth.  
> [6] Shout, and sing for joy, O inhabitant of Zion,  
> for great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel.”

## Epistle [2Co 5:16‑21 ESV; sermon text]

[16] From now on, therefore, we regard no one according to the flesh. Even though we once regarded Christ according to the flesh, we regard him thus no longer. [17] Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old has passed away; behold, the new has come. [18] All this is from God, who through Christ reconciled us to himself and gave us the ministry of reconciliation; [19] that is, in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses against them, and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation. [20] Therefore, we are ambassadors for Christ, God making his appeal through us. We implore you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God. [21] For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.

## Holy Gospel [Lk 15:1‑3, 11‑32 ESV]

[1] Now the tax collectors and sinners were all drawing near to hear him. [2] And the Pharisees and the scribes grumbled, saying, “This man receives sinners and eats with them.”

[3] So he told them this parable:

[11] And he said, “There was a man who had two sons. [12] And the younger of them said to his father, ‘Father, give me the share of property that is coming to me.’ And he divided his property between them. [13] Not many days later, the younger son gathered all he had and took a journey into a far country, and there he squandered his property in reckless living. [14] And when he had spent everything, a severe famine arose in that country, and he began to be in need. [15] So he went and hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him into his fields to feed pigs. [16] And he was longing to be fed with the pods that the pigs ate, and no one gave him anything.

[17] “But when he came to himself, he said, ‘How many of my father's hired servants have more than enough bread, but I perish here with hunger! [18] I will arise and go to my father, and I will say to him, “Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. [19] I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Treat me as one of your hired servants.”’ [20] And he arose and came to his father. But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and felt compassion, and ran and embraced him and kissed him. [21] And the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’ [22] But the father said to his servants, ‘Bring quickly the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. [23] And bring the fattened calf and kill it, and let us eat and celebrate. [24] For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.’ And they began to celebrate.

[25] “Now his older son was in the field, and as he came and drew near to the house, he heard music and dancing. [26] And he called one of the servants and asked what these things meant. [27] And he said to him, ‘Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received him back safe and sound.’ [28] But he was angry and refused to go in. His father came out and entreated him, [29] but he answered his father, ‘Look, these many years I have served you, and I never disobeyed your command, yet you never gave me a young goat, that I might celebrate with my friends. [30] But when this son of yours came, who has devoured your property with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him!’ [31] And he said to him, ‘Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours. [32] It was fitting to celebrate and be glad, for this your brother was dead, and is alive; he was lost, and is found.’”

## Introit [Ps 51:2-6; antiphon: Ps 51:1]

> Have mercy on me, O God, according to your | steadfast love;*  
> according to your abundant mercy blot out my trans- | gressions.  
> Wash me thoroughly from my in- | iquity,*  
> and cleanse me | from my sin!  
> For I know my trans- | gressions,*  
> and my sin is ever be- | fore me.  
> Against you, you only, have I sinned and done what is evil | in your sight,*  
> so that you may be justified in your words and blameless in your | judgment.  
> Behold, I was brought forth in in- | iquity,*  
> and in sin did my mother con- | ceive me.  
> Behold, you delight in truth in the inward | being,*  
> and you teach me wisdom in the | secret heart.

## Collect

Almighty God, our heavenly Father,
Your mercies are new every morning;
and though we deserve only punishment,
You receive us as Your children
and provide for all our needs of body and soul.
Grant that we may heartily acknowledge Your merciful goodness,
give thanks for all Your benefits,
and serve You in willing obedience;
through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.

## Hymns

* Opening hymn: _TLH_ 144 _Jesus Grant that Balm and Healing_ 
* Sermon hymn: _TLH_ 473 _The Church's One Foundation_
* Communion hymn: _TLH_ 315 _I come, O Savior, to Thy Table_ st 11-15
* Closing hymn: _TLH_ 146 _Lamb of God, Pure and Holy_

## Sermon

Beloved in the Lord, we encounter a verse in our Epistle reading today about _God's_ righteousness.
_My_ righteousness matters a lot to me.
“I've done something right; you've done something wrong.”
And what are you thinking about me?
“You've done something wrong; I've done something right.”
Who is wrong? Who is right? _Let's fight!_
_[Illustration]_ Imagine two boys fighting on a dusty baseball diamond—there is a cloud of dust with two fighting boys in the middle.
That is what happens when two people meet who both think they are right
and the other person is wrong.
The dust flies. And these boys are on the same team.

Well, the team manager sees the fight and breaks it up.
He sets the boys in on the bench on the first‑base line and the next thing you know—and this is just a story—Roman soldiers appear on the ball field, carrying a cross.
They make the manager carry the cross and then they crucifiy him on the pitcher's mound.
The two boys who were once fighting look at each other and say,
“What has Coach done? He's done nothing wrong!”

> **For our sake [God] made [Christ] to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.**

Now the Manager is dead, and at least the boys have forgotten about who is right and who is wrong.
They mourn that their silly fight caused the death of their coach.
But it was more than that:
every game they lost that they should have won;
all the equipment that they did not take care of and had to be replaced.
Everything that the team failed at was piling up,
and now two of the players lost their cool and fought each other.

“Who is the Manager of this lousy team?” God calls out as the Roman soldiers appear on the ball field.

“I am,” answers the Manager.

“Then You must die. For no team that is so bad deserves to live.”

But it is the manager who dies so that the team lives to see another game.

> **“I will give thanks to you, O LORD,**  
> **for though you were angry with me,**  
> **your anger turned away,**  
> **that you might comfort me.”** [(Is 12:1)](http://www.esvbible.org/Isaiah%2012%3A1/)

_[Point to Crucifixion window]_ Christ was made sin for us on the Cross; God's anger was turned on Him instead of us.
_[Point to Baptism window]_ He was made Manager of the sinners' team when He was baptized in the Jordan River; He took on a losing team while the Father told the team, **“This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased”** [(Mt 3:17 ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Matthew%203%3A17/).

Our sins have defeated our righteousness at every corner.
_Are you a father, mother, son, daughter, husband, wife, or worker? … Have you stolen, been negligent, wasted anything, or done any harm?_
Then you have nothing to boast about except your _un_righteouness,
which is very popular these days.
But righteous God must destroy you for your unrighteousness, and thanks be to God that He made Jesus your Manager.

The rest of the team was not even there to see the Crucifixion,
but now the two boys who once were fighting but now are friends have to find the team and tell them something.
“Coach has been crucified but now He's alive again.
God has forgiven us for being such a bad team.”
This is the ministry of reconciliation that was entrusted to the apostles and today to the called pastors of the church.
Our job is to tell the team what the Lord has done for them,
and to use the tools of the Spirit that our Lord has given us to go out and play another game.

We now play differently from the world in order to honor our Lord Jesus—we reflect not our own, but His own righteousness. AMEN.

## Outline

<center>ZZZ</center>

## Notes

Lk 15. The father ran and embraced his son.

ZZZ<sup>[<a name="id0002" href="#ftn.id0002">§</a>]</sup>

## Footnotes

<sup>[<a name="ftn.id0002" href="#id0002">§</a>]</sup>
ZZZ
